.START 

There's an intense debate in South Korean President Roh Tae Woo's inner circle over his scheduled speech Wednesday to a joint meeting of Congress: Should he give it in English or Korean? 

It would be more effective with the U.S. politicians and public in English, the president's foreign policy advisers argue.
But, counter some domestic political aides, it would hurt Mr. Roh at home if he seems to be pandering to the Americans. 

U.S. politicians and policy-makers would do well to remember such backhome pressures on the South Korean president as they prepare for an important series of meetings with him this week.
For U.S.-South Korean relations, in economic and security terms, are at their most critical stage since the Korean War. 

When most Americans think about South Korea, they still conjure up images of the war years, popularized by the TV series M*A*S*H.
But South Korea no longer is a backwater, Third World country.
With a dynamic, growing economy, it is the U.S.'s seventh-largest trading partner.
Moreover, the Korean peninsula remains one of the strategic focal points of East Asia; there are 43,000 U.S. troops stationed there.
And the country is at a political crossroads now, as it struggles with its new experiment in democracy. 

South Korea is "critically important to us now, both economically and in terms of security," says Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), the former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. "Unfortunately, many Americans don't think much about Korea.
But the miracle of their economic growth and the development of democracy -- imperfect though it is -- are very important to the United States." One major topic during Mr. Roh's visit will be human rights.
Due process still is denied in South Korea; a few months ago, Kim Dae Jung, the major opposition leader, was detained and interrogated for 20 hours by security thugs.
Just as Pope John Paul II did in Seoul last week, President Bush and members of Congress ought to tell Mr. Roh in no uncertain terms that this kind of behavior is unacceptable. 

But context is important.
South Korea had a free election last year; the liberals lost only because they couldn't unite behind one candidate.
Moreover, there is a violent anti-U.S. minority in South Korea -- as demonstrated by the handful of radical students who broke into U.S. Ambassador Donald Gregg's residence in Seoul Friday and vandalized it (the ambassador and his wife were unharmed). 

Mr. Roh, a former general and a member of the repressive previous regime, has made impressive strides in supporting democratic values and institutions.
It isn't a perfect democracy, but it's a far cry from the authoritarian rule of only a few years ago. 

One thing that hasn't changed in South Korea is paranoia about North Korea; several people are being prosecuted for making unapproved visits to the communist north.
But a visit to Panmunjom, where the constant tension between the communists and the joint U.S.-South Korean forces is palpable, makes it easier to understand these feelings.
Sometimes U.S. politicians forget that North Korea, a country with a population of only 20 million, has an armed force of over one million troops, the sixth largest in the world. 

Whatever winds of change are blowing through much of the communist bloc, they haven't reached Pyongyang.
As long as it continues to pose a real threat, U.S. critics ought to go slow on demands to reduce troop levels in South Korea. 

The major topic when Mr. Roh calls on administration and congressional figures this week will be economics and trade.
South Korea hardly is without fault for trade frictions with the U.S.; most experts in the administration think that Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher got it exactly wrong a few months ago when he declared that South Korea is more open economically than Japan.
On agricultural products in particular -- everything from beef to apples -- the Koreans have succumbed to domestic political pressures for protectionism. 

Yet, earlier this year, South Korea promised to make some real concessions on its investment laws and other trade impediments.
They enabled the country to avoid being targeted as an unfair trade partner under the tough "Super 301" section of the 1988 U.S. trade act.
Separately, as a result of the revaluation of the won and other measures, the almost $10 billion trade surplus the South Koreans enjoyed with the U.S last year will be cut in half this year. 

Moreover, just a few days ago, the national assembly, with the governing and opposition parties in an unusual alliance, passed a resolution calling for a gradual opening up of South Korean agricultural markets. 

It's appropriate for U.S. officials to keep hammering for more open trade policies, as U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills did in Seoul last week.
But there's also sometimes a tendency in American political circles to pick especially on South Korea, out of frustration over our inability to do much about Japan.
That's counterproductive. 

Most importantly, it's time for American policy-makers to better appreciate that our economic future rests more with Asia -- Seoul as well as Tokyo -- than anyplace else. 

The U.S. always ought to stand up for its interests, but it's essential that U.S. officials have an appreciation of the politics and history of our allies.
In the upper echelons of the Roh Tae Woo's government, they're still buzzing about Commerce Secretary Mosbacher's trip to South Korea earlier this year.
It seems he learned, for the first time, that South Korea had been occupied for decades by Japan. 

