.START 

Securities analysts are using terms like "kitchen-sink syndrome" and "clearing the decks" to describe the generally disappointing results that commercial banks are expected to report in the coming weeks. 

A number of major banks have chosen to make huge additions to their loan-loss reserves in the third quarter, either for troubled loans to Latin American nations, soured real-estate loans in this country or bad loans to companies involved in leveraged buy-outs. 

The banks hope to get the bad news behind them now, so that their earnings -- and their stock prices -- can rebound in the coming quarters. 

J.P. Morgan & Co. has effectively neutralized any problems that its developing-country loan portfolio could pose in the future by announcing a $2 billion addition to reserves for the quarter.
As a result, Morgan will post a loss for the quarter and year. 

Similarly, Manufacturers Hanover Corp. made a big addition to reserves for developing-country debt that will cause it to post a loss.
Chase Manhattan Corp. on Wednesday, as expected, reported a net loss for the third quarter of $1.11 billion, or $12.45 a share, following a massive addition to reserves for possible losses on loans primarily to developing countries. 

And several regional banks, including Bank of Boston Corp. and First Bank System Inc., are expected to report losses stemming from major additions to reserves for foundering domestic loans. 

With all this disappointing news, analysts wouldn't be surprised to see other banks, particularly those with loans to developing countries, use the spate of reserve-building by others as an opportunity to clean up their own balance sheets. 

The nation's biggest banking company, Citicorp, isn't expected to follow the lead of Manufacturers, Chase and Morgan with a massive boost in reserves.
Nevertheless, analysts expect Citicorp's third quarter will be near its level for the same period a year ago and therefore somewhat disappointing. 

Many analysts were expecting generally weak third-quarter results anyway due to continued rises in non-performing loans and pressure on interest-rate margins. 

Keefe, Bruyette & Woods Inc., a securities firm specializing in bank stocks, estimates that third-quarter results will rise 8% from the year-ago figure for 144 regional banks that it follows.
That's the smallest increase this year. 

The principal reason for the slower growth is the narrowing difference in interest rates on loans and the cost of interest-bearing consumer deposits.
Keefe estimates this difference will shrink to 4.39 percentage points in the third quarter, the lowest level in a year. 

Further deterioration in domestic loan quality is adding to the pressure on earnings.
Nonperforming real-estate loans in New England continue to climb, and the number of highly leveraged commercial loans that have gotten into trouble is rising.
Hooker International, Seaman Furniture Co., Lomas Financial Group Inc., Integrated Resources Inc. and Resorts International Inc. are some of the more prominent troubled concerns. 

