.START 

Major steel companies, stung by soft demand from car makers and eroding prices, are expected to report that third-quarter operating profits plummeted to possibly the lowest levels in two years. 

"This will be the worst quarter since the third quarter of 1987, when steel companies were just on their way up," predicted John Tumazos, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
The fourth quarter could be even more dismal. 

"We are in the midst of a very severe price drop that will really hit in the fourth quarter," said Peter Marcus, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc.
A rebound in those prices is expected sometime after the winter of 1990. 

After enjoying a 24-month honeymoon of full production, rising prices and lower costs, steelmakers are facing declining volume from disappointing automotive, appliance and even capital goods markets. 

The consensus is that major steelmakers earned between $30 and $35 for each ton of steel shipped, compared with $49 in last year's third quarter.
The latest quarter is also down from the $51 a ton earned in the second quarter, when the industry benefited from modest price increases and lower raw material costs.
Mr. Marcus expects fourth-quarter profits to drop to about $25 a ton. 

Along with lackluster sales to car makers -- their largest customer -- steelmakers are losing shipments to their second largest customer, steel service centers, which are trying to reduce inventories.
The Steel Service Center Institute reported in September that 72% of its members believe inventories were "too high," with 65% planning to reduce those levels during the next six months. 

Christopher Plummer, an analyst with WEFA Group, noted that the capital goods market, which had been stronger than automotive and appliance markets, is showing signs of weakness as well.
Companies, concerned about the economy and trying to slash their own costs, are backing off capital improvement programs, he said. 

Overall, second-half steel shipments are expected to drop about 15% to 36 million or 37 million tons, which some analysts say could cost the industry $700 million in lost income. 

Two companies, in particular, were hurt by unusual events in the third quarter.
Bethlehem Steel Corp., the nation's second largest steelmaker, was hampered by wildcat coal strikes, a spot strike at its freight car operation and blast furnace problems at its crown jewel Sparrows Point plant.
Charles Bradford, an analyst with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, predicts Bethlehem earnings dropped more than two-thirds to about 50 cents a share, from $2.35 a year ago, excluding major nonrecurring items. 

National Steel Corp., the nation's sixth largest steel company, predicted at the beginning of 1989 that the third quarter would be its best.
However, an initial rejection by steelworkers of a new labor accord sent nervous National Steel customers scrambling for alternative suppliers.
Moreover, National Steel is tied closely to the sluggish automobile industry. 

One other factor for some steelmakers: higher costs associated with new labor contracts.
Inland Steel Industries Inc., which recently negotiated an accord that calls for immediate and significant wage increases, is expected to see earnings drop to less than $1 a share from $1.70 a year earlier because of the pact, as well as disappointments in its steel service center operations. 

About the only major steelmaker expected to post improved results is USX Corp., which once again will post gains from asset sales.
Many analysts initially raised earnings forecasts for the nation's largest steelmaker as a result of the coming sale of reserves from its Texas Oil & Gas unit.
The expected $1 billion-plus proceeds are expected to be used to reduce debt and buy back shares.
One wild card in USX's future earnings is investor Carl Icahn, who boosted his stake in USX and is urging more restructuring. 

Recent order rates indicate that the fourth quarter, a time shipments usually pick up, will be weak as well.
Merrill Lynch's Mr. Bradford said, "We haven't seen the pickup in flat rolled orders that we should have." Flat rolled steel is the industry's major product. 

Typically, steelmakers would look to the export market to unload excess capacity.
But that market is hurting as well.
PaineWebber noted that the world steel export price of cold-rolled steel has dropped to $460 to $480 a metric ton from a high of $560 this spring.
Moreover, the relative strength of the dollar and lower world prices may result in increased sales in the U.S. by foreign producers offering lower prices. 

There are some bright spots for the industry.
The service center association reports that shipments were up in August, indicating a resurgence in demand for carbon flat rolled and stainless steel products.
John Jacobson, an analyst with AUS Consultants, also said he believes steel production costs are coming down because of increased efficiencies at major mills. 

