.START 

Troubled British defense contractor Ferranti International Signal PLC replaced the head of its scandal-plagued U.S. division. 

Ferranti said Joseph Zilligen, 49 years old, chairman of Ferranti International USA, is "relinquishing" his post.
Succeeding him as chairman of the large, Lancaster, Pa.-based unit, is a longtime Ferranti executive, Albert Dodd.
Mr. Dodd, a 53-year-old Briton, is a Ferranti board member and managing director of Ferranti's instrumentation division. 

The U.S. unit is at the center of what Ferranti has called a "serious fraud" that has rocked the British company for the past month.
Ferranti acquired the U.S. business last year, in a merger with the then International Signal & Control Group 

An International Signal unit, according to Ferranti, reported on its books #215 million ($332.5 million) of weapons contracts that didn't exist.
The falsified figures inflated International Signal's reported assets, and increased the price Ferranti paid when it bought the company, according to Ferranti officials. 

Mr. Zilligen's departure is the latest fallout from the scandal.
Ferranti has said it expects an accounting correction that would eliminate nearly half its reported net worth, and it's seeking a buyer to repair its finances. 

British Aerospace PLC and France's Thomson-CSF S.A. are leading contenders for a joint Ferranti bid.
Yesterday, a London brokerage firm, Hoare Govett Ltd., confirmed that it purchased on Wednesday 5.7 million Ferranti shares at 56 pence (87 cents) apiece on behalf of British Aerospace.
The purchase boosts the British Aerospace-Thomson stake to 12.98 million shares, or 1.7% of the stock outstanding. 

A Ferranti spokesman declined to comment on whether the management shuffle is related to the financial scandal, but called it generally part of the "integration" of International Signal into Ferranti since the 1988 merger.
He said Mr. Zilligen remains a Ferranti director, but will also be succeeded by Mr. Dodd as chief executive of Ferranti Italia. 

Mr. Zilligen, through a spokesman in Lancaster, declined to comment.
The executive was a colleague since 1980 of International Signal founder James Guerin, who left International Signal and Ferranti last spring. 

