.START 

A federal appeals court in San Francisco ruled that shareholders can't hold corporate officials liable for false sales projections on new products if the news media concurrently revealed substantial information about the product's flaws. 

The ruling stems from a 1984 suit filed by shareholders of Apple Computer Inc., claiming that company officials misled investors about the expected success of the Lisa computer, introduced in 1983. 

Lawyers specializing in shareholder suits said they are concerned that use of the "press defense" by corporations may become popular as a result of the ruling. 

According to the suit, Apple officials created public excitement by touting Lisa as an office computer that would revolutionize the workplace and be extremely successful in its first year.
The plaintiffs also alleged that prior to the fanfare, the company circulated internal memos indicating problems with Lisa. 

The suit claimed Apple's stock climbed to a high of $63.50 a share on the basis of the company's optimistic forecasts.
But when the company revealed Lisa's poor sales late in 1983, the stock plummeted to a low of $17.37 a share, according to the suit.
The shareholders claimed more than $150 million in losses. 

In 1987, the San Francisco district court dismissed the case largely because newspaper reports had sufficiently counterbalanced the company's statements by alerting consumers to Lisa's problems. 

Late last month, the appeals court agreed that most of the case should be dismissed.
However, it gave the shareholders the right to pursue a small portion of their claim that pertains to Lisa's disk drive, known as Twiggy.
The court ruled that the news media didn't reveal Twiggy's problems at the time. 

Lawyers are worried about the ruling's implication in other shareholder suits but pointed out that the court stressed that the ruling should be regarded as very specific to the Apple case. 

"The court was careful to say that the adverse information appeared in the very same articles and received the same attention as the company's statements," said Patrick Grannon, a Los Angeles lawyer at the firm of Greenfield & Chimicles, which wasn't involved in the case. "The court is saying that the adverse facts have to be transferred to the market with equal intensity and credibility as the statements of corporate insiders." 

Shareholders' attorneys at the New York firm of Milberg, Weiss, Bershad, Specthrie & Lerach last week petitioned for a rehearing of the case.
They wrote: "The opinion establishes a new rule of immunity -- that if a wide variety of opinions on a company's business are publicly reported, the company can say anything without fear of securities liability." 

NFL ORDERED to pay $5.5 million in legal fees to defunct 

The National Football League is considering appealing the ruling stemming from the U.S. Football League's largely unsuccessful antitrust suit against the NFL. 

A jury in 1986 agreed with the USFL's claims that the NFL monopolized major league football.
But the jury awarded the USFL only $1 in damages, trebled because of the antitrust claims. 

Last week, the U.S. Court of Appeals in New York upheld a $5.5 million award of attorneys fees to the defunct league.
Harvey D. Myerson, of Myerson & Kuhn, then of Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Heine, Underberg, Manley, Myerson & Casey, was the lead trial lawyer, and his new firm pursued the application appeal.
Douglas R. Pappas of Myerson & Kuhn says about $5.3 million of the award goes directly to the USFL to reimburse it for fees already paid.
Myerson & Kuhn will get about $260,000 for the costs of pressing the application. 

The federal appeals court held that the nominal damages and the failure to prove all claims didn't exclude the USFL from being reimbursed.
Antitrust laws provide that injured parties may be reimbursed for lawyers' fees. 

But Shepard Goldfein, an attorney for the NFL, says his client will consider asking for another hearing or appealing to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Mr. Goldfein, of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom in New York, says the ruling is wrong and the fee award is excessive because the USFL lost its major claims, including its contention that the NFL restrained trade through television contracts. 

"The USFL was not the prevailing party," Mr. Goldfein insists. 

HOUSTON-CALGARY ALLIANCE: Fulbright & Jaworski of Houston and Fenerty, Robertson, Fraser & Hatch of Calgary, Alberta, are affiliating to help serve their energy-industry clients.
The affiliation is believed to be the first such cross-border arrangement among major law firms.
The firms aren't required to refer work exclusively to each other and remain separate organizations.
But they will work together on energy-, environmental- and fair-trade-related issues and conduct seminars on topics of mutual interest, said Gibson Gayle Jr. of 585-lawyer Fulbright & Jaworski.
In addition, Fulbright & Jaworski's Washington, D.C., office will play a key role as the firms work together on regulatory issues, particularly natural-gas exports, for their clients.
The arrangement, reached after about eight months of negotiations, grew out of 80-lawyer Fenerty Robertson's desire to develop ties with a U.S. firm in light of relaxed trade barriers between the U.S. and Canada, said Francis M. Saville of Fenerty Robertson. 

IN WHAT MAY SIGNAL a turnaround for asbestos manufacturers, W.R. Grace & Co. won a 3 1/2-week trial in Pittsburgh over whether it should be required to remove asbestos fireproofing from a local high school.
Mount Lebanon High School, near Pittsburgh, sought $21 million in compensatory damages from Grace, arguing that the asbestos, which can cause respiratory diseases and lung cancer, posed a risk to students.
Grace successfully contended that removing the fire retardant would pose a greater health risk than leaving it alone.
A spokesman for the company said the verdict is thought to be the first in favor of an asbestos manufacturer where the plaintiff was a school and the asbestos in question was used for fireproofing. 

FCC COUNSEL JOINS FIRM: Diane S. Killory will join 500-lawyer Morrison & Foerster as a partner in its Washington, D.C., office in mid-November.
She will help develop the mass-media practice of the San Francisco-based firm's communications group.
Ms. Killory, 35 years old, resigned as Federal Communications Commission general counsel early this month after nearly three years in that post.
She was the first woman to be appointed FCC general counsel. 

RICHARD P. MAGURNO, formerly Eastern Airlines' top lawyer, joined the New York law firm of Lord Day & Lord, Barrett Smith as a partner.
Mr. Magurno, 45, spent 17 years at the Miami airline unit of Houston-based Texas Air Corp. and was named general counsel in 1984.
He left the company in 1987.
Mr. Magurno said he will split his time between the 200-lawyer firm's offices in Washington, D.C., and New York, with specialties in aviation and labor law. 

