.START 

"In our business," says Groupe Bull Chairman Francis Lorentz, "one and one sometimes add up to 1.1, or 1.2, but rarely two." 

Mr. Lorentz is talking about mergers, not mathematics.
Bull, the French-government-owned computer maker, earlier this month agreed to buy the computer business of Zenith Electronics Corp. for as much as $635 million, but denies this is a merger.
Bull says it intends to retain existing management of the U.S. unit and keep the Zenith label, while selling Zenith personal computers -- a product line in which Bull had been lagging -- as part of Bull data-processing systems. 

Merger or not, the Zenith acquisition is a key part of Mr. Lorentz's plan to grow Bull -- the world's 11th biggest computer company last year -- into a profitable member of the top five or six computer makers.
It won't be easy.
Bull had a first-half net loss of 537 million francs ($82.7 million) on revenue of 14 billion francs ($2.16 billion).
Mr. Lorentz says his objective remains posting a small profit for this year, but he isn't certain the company will make it into the black. 

He adds that any full-year loss won't be "anywhere as big" as the first-half loss, which was caused in part by production problems, "which are being solved," at the company's Angers, France, circuit-board plant and a squeeze on profit margins because of growing competition.
In any event, Bull thus far hasn't had any trouble finding the cash to fund its acquisitions.
Bull posted a profit in 1988 of 303 million francs on revenue of 31.55 billion francs. 

The other key to Bull's future health is its other U.S. leg.
Bull last year increased to 69.4% its controlling interest in Honeywell Bull Inc. Honeywell Inc. retains 15.6%, and NEC Corp. of Japan owns the remaining 15%.
In addition, Bull renamed the U.S. company Bull HN Information Services Inc. Bull HN reports to Mr. Lorentz as chairman of holding company Cie. des Machines Bull.
During the past decade or so, Bull and Honeywell tried various approaches to combining their businesses, none of which really jelled. "We were spending all our energies internally, while externally the world was changing at breakneck speed," Mr. Lorentz says. 

But now, with Bull in firm control, these U.S. operations are key ingredients in Mr. Lorentz's plans to ensure that Bull remains one of the half-dozen or so world-wide, full-range computer companies likely to survive the 1990s.
To do so, Bull is planting itself firmly in the U.S., where, says Mr. Lorentz, a lot of the best people and research are.
The Zenith buy means Bull will derive 22% of its revenue from the U.S. -- up from 18% previously -- and the company spends 30% of its 3.64 billion-franc research and development budget in the U.S. 

Keeping Zenith relatively independant, says Mr. Lorentz, makes sense because "they are completely different cultures, making personal computers, like Zenith, and making mainframes like Bull." He says disarmingly: "We aren't fast enough.
We {mainframe makers} live in cycles of four or five years of development and product life.
They {PC makers} get six months of development and maybe 12 months of shelf life.
They can afford to take some risks and fail." 

"It is absolutely essential to keep Zenith's originality, its extraordinary force," the 47-year-old Mr. Lorentz adds. 

"Our vocation is to be able to respond to any question our clients ask," says Mr. Lorentz, who joined Bull seven years ago after stints as chief financial officer of a water company and various posts in the French Treasury. "We want to be able to offer complete systems in specialized areas, like banking, ranging from the automated-teller machines to the front-desk workstation to the back-office equipment to the mainframe computer.
To do these we need to make all the basic building blocks." 

Mr. Lorentz succeeded Jacques Stern as chairman of Bull in June, and like his predecessor, he is a crusader for "open software" -- that is standards that will work on the machines of various makers -- in order to give smaller companies like Bull a chance against industry giants.
Mr. Lorentz, Mr. Stern's No. 2 since 1982, inherits the task of making Bull the biggest and healthiest European soup-to-nuts computer company, competing globally with the likes of International Business Machines Corp., Unisys Corp., and a handful of Japanese companies.
Counting only sales of computer equipment, Bull is already the biggest in Europe, ahead of Siemens AG of West Germany and Ing.
C. Olivetti & Co. of Italy, Mr. Lorentz says. 

Mr. Lorentz, an intense, cerebral product of France's elite "Ecole National d'Administration" likes to go rock climbing in his spare time, and used to practice the martial art of aikido.
He will discuss frankly Bull's past problems; when asked if the company has suffered from an unfocussed image, he readily agrees.
He allows that the products of all computer makers are getting more and more alike -- "a certain banalization" he calls it -- and that specialized service will make the difference in the future. "How we manage the problem of service will make all the difference between now and 1995," he says.
After having added Zenith PCs to the Bull stable, Mr. Lorentz says, the company will be better armed for battle especially in Europe. "Our biggest asset is that we are well implanted in Europe, and Europe will be the fastest growing market in the world over the next 10 years." But the conquest of Europe will happen, in part, from the U.S. 

"The information industry is global," says Mr. Lorenz, "but the image of that industry is created in the U.S., so we must be present in the U.S. in order to be known everywhere else.
The U.S. represents 45% of the world information market, so it's 45% of our world.
The technology and the human resources are there, and since the scarcest resource for us is people, and the people are in the U.S., so are we.
That's the whole story." 

