.START 

With stock prices hovering near record levels, a number of companies have been announcing stock splits. 

But investors trying to play all the angles may find that stock splits are a lot like cotton candy: They look tempting, but there's hardly any substance.
And they can even leave a sticky problem, in the form of higher brokerage commissions. 

"A stock split unaccompanied by a cash dividend increase is like giving somebody five singles for a $5 bill.
You've got a thicker billfold, but it has no economic significance whatsoever," says Leon Cooperman, a partner at Goldman, Sachs & Co. 

In a typical split, a company increases the number of shares it has outstanding, with each stockholder participating on the basis of existing holdings.
With a 2-for-1 split, for example, an investor who owned 100 shares before the split would have 200 shares afterward.
The stock's price usually falls to reflect the greater number of shares, assuming no other changes at the company. 

Companies usually split their shares in the hope that a lower share price will attract more individual investors, increase trading volume and improve the stock's liquidity.
The theory is that a stock selling for $20 or $30 a share will be more affordable to individuals than one selling for more than $100 -- especially for investors who like to buy round lots of 100 shares. 

Take L.A. Gear Inc., a fast-growing designer and marketer of athletic footwear that had a 2-for-1 split last month.
The main reason for the split was "to make the stock more attractive to the retail buyer," says Elliott J. Horowitz, the company's executive vice president and chief financial officer. 

But if a stock suddenly becomes more attractive to the masses, shouldn't that boost its price?
After all, L.A. Gear was selling for around $60 a share when the split was announced on Aug. 24, then soared to more than $75 a share before splitting in late September.
Yesterday, the stock closed at $41.75. 

Mr. Horowitz scoffs at the idea that his company's price surge was caused by the split. "If it were that easy to take a stock from 60 to 75, I think a lot of other companies would be doing it," he says.
While a split "does create more demand for the stock," he says, "I just don't think it's that much of a factor." 

Investment managers and others agree.
While a stock split accompanied by a dividend increase can pack a powerful punch, a split by itself "has no lasting impact on the stock price," says Mr. Cooperman of Goldman Sachs. 

Adds James L. Cochrane, senior vice president at the New York Stock Exchange: "We've done research on this, and it shows a split really doesn't to seem to matter significantly." 

Even if splits did affect stock prices, some academics argue that it would be futile for investors to try to take advantage of them.
In their view, financial markets tend to anticipate news.
Thus any impact from a split would already be incorporated in a stock's price by the time the split was announced, they argue. 

"Normally, the investor isn't able to benefit" by buying a company's stock immediately after news of a split, says Frank K. Reilly, a Notre Dame professor of finance and co-author of a 1981 study on splits. "By the time the average investor hears the news, traders already have acted and the stock already has moved." 

A few money managers even say a stock split sometimes may represent a sell signal. "Remember the old Wall Street adage: Buy on the rumor and sell on the news," says Samuel Thorne Jr., a managing director at Scudder, Stevens & Clark in Boston. 

Splits can also mean a bigger expense for investors when they buy or sell shares.
That's because brokerage houses often calculate their commission rates using a complex formula based partly on the number of shares being traded. 

For example, a Merrill Lynch official says that firm's commission on 100 shares of a $40 stock would be about $97.
But the commission would jump to about $115 to trade 200 shares of a $20 stock -- even though the dollar amount of the trade would be exactly the same.
Another large firm gave similar figures: The standard commission on 100 shares of a $40 stock would be $91, but the commission would jump to $112.50 to trade 200 shares of a $20 stock. 

"Stock splits are the biggest ripoff on Wall Street," contends Hans R. Reinisch, a New York investor. "The only thing that changes with a split is the brokerage commissions, and they often go up sharply.
If you're an active investor, you have to take into account the transaction costs." 

Some corporate executives also question the idea that more shares are better.
Among these is Warren E. Buffett, chairman and chief executive officer of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., whose stock closed yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange at $8,700 a share. 

"We often are asked why Berkshire does not split its stock," he wrote in the company's 1983 annual report. "The assumption behind this question usually appears to be that a split would be a pro-shareholder action.
We disagree." 

In the lengthy discussion that followed, Mr. Buffett said: "We want {shareholders} who think of themselves as business owners with the intention of staying a long time.
And, we want those who keep their eyes focused on business results, not market prices." 

Underscoring his feelings on the subject, Mr. Buffett once sent a birthday greeting to a friend, wishing him good health and saying: "May you live until Berkshire splits." 

Still, many companies like splits as an inexpensive marketing tool that generates favorable publicity and helps broaden their shareholder base. 

A stock split is "a nice exercise in cosmetics, but that's about all," says James H. Coxon, senior vice president and head of the common-stock division at Cigna Investments Inc. "It's a small net positive because it can improve the marketability of a particular stock.
But it's really of very little significance." 

A split's impact, if any, can depend on the company involved and the price of that company's stock, says John P. Rosenthal, senior partner of Silberberg, Rosenthal & Co.
But he adds that any impact from a split "really is very short-term." 

Advises Michael Metz, a managing director at Oppenheimer & Co: "Just ignore splits." In his view, "They're irrelevant for the long-term investor.
Look only at the fundamentals of a company, not whether it splits its stock." 

