.START 

Bolstered by a robust long-distance business, the telephone industry is expected to post a healthy profit increase for the third quarter. 

Analysts estimate that third-quarter earnings for the industry will increase as much as 19% from the year-earlier period.
If so, their cumulative earnings could hit $4.12 billion. 

Most of the earnings growth, however, will come from the long-distance sector.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. is expected to post a profit increase of about 18% and MCI Communications Corp. 's earnings are expected to surge 58%. 

United Telecommunications Inc. reported last Wednesday that third-quarter net income climbed 75% to $94.6 million, or 90 cents a share, on revenue of $1.93 billion.
United Telecom's Sprint unit posted operating profit of $60 million. 

Paul Aran, a telecommunications analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co., said the long-distance companies have been buoyed by strong growth in the facsimile and data-service business.
He said declining long-distance prices also have helped stimulate usage. 

The local telephone companies, however, aren't expected to fare as well.
Growth is predicted to be in the 1% to 2% range for most companies, with Southern New England Telephone and GTE Corp. posting profit increases in the neighborhood of 10%. 

"The long-distance companies have kept their momentum," says Robert Morris III, a telecommunications analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co., "while the pace of growth for the local telephone companies is slowing." That's especially true for the regional Bell companies. 

He said regulation is primarily responsible for the Bells' dull earnings growth.
Most companies have reached their maximum allowed earnings ceilings, which are set by regulators. "This signals the need for regulatory change," Mr. Morris said. 

Pacific Telesis Group, which is expected to post earnings of about 75 cents a share, obtained regulatory relief from California regulators last week.
Under the plan, the company is allowed to earn more if it can operate more efficiently.
In the year-earlier quarter, Pacific Telesis earned $318 million, or 75 cents a share, on revenue of $2.38 billion. 

Analysts expect installations of new telephone lines to grow about 3%.
However, GTE, BellSouth Corp. and Pacific Telesis, which operate in territories with hearty economies, are expected to report new-telephone-line growth in the range of 4% to 5%.
Nynex Corp. 's profits could begin to show signs of weakening from the effects of a nearly three-month strike, while other Bell companies, such as Ameritech and Southwestern Bell Corp., could be hurt in the quarter by one-time charges associated with the settlement of new union contracts. 

Mr. Aran, the Bear Stearns analyst, said that generally, after eight weeks, "A strike starts hurting earnings.
I'm waiting to see what the impact is on Nynex." 

Analysts predict Nynex earnings will be about $1.57 a share, compared with $1.72 a share a year earlier, when the company earned $338.9 million on sales of $3.18 billion. 

The independent telephone companies also may post third-quarter results that trail the comparable year-ago period.
Rochester Telephone Co., for instance, said it expects third-quarter earnings to be "somewhat lower" than the year-earlier quarter -- even though the company expects to post an extraordinary gain of 50 cents during the period.
The company said higher expenses and competitive pressures hampered earnings. 

For the 1988 third quarter, Rochester Telephone reported a net income of $12.9 million, or $1.10 a share, on revenue of $120.2 million. 

