.START 

"Time," says Tamara Geva, "is meaningless.
My youth in Petrograd, my father -- whom I never saw again after 1924, when I left Russia for the West -- the whole of my early life, it's all been brought back to me by the arrival, out of a clear blue sky, of this exhibition.
The years between Petrograd and New York are the dream.
The objects I grew up with, the things I thought I had said goodbye to forever -- that is the reality." 

The reality to which Ms. Geva refers is the hoard of dance memorabilia currently on view at Eduard Nakhamkin Fine Arts here, under the title, "100 Years of Russian Ballet: 1830-1930." Consisting of roughly 400 items from the Leningrad State Museum of Theater and Music, the show offers tantalizing glimpses of a rich artistic achievement. 

For Ms. Geva, an actress and author who began her career as a dancer during the early days of the Soviet state under her original name of Gevergeyeva, it offers something more: a sense of completion, the lifting of a curtain on the past.
A great deal of what is currently on display in New York belonged to her father.
These lithographs, designs, programs, photographs, which she pored over day after day, fed her adolescent yearning to join the ballet.
Of this ambition her father disapproved, because, he said, dancers weren't properly educated. 

Levki Gevergeyev had a passion for learning and for the arts, especially the performing arts.
In addition to his holdings of theatrical material, he also owned 50,000 books, among them a great cache of bibles, although, in fact, he was an atheist.
That didn't keep him from making a great deal of money manufacturing gold vestments for the Russian Orthodox Church.
He owned a 26-room house, in which, according to his daughter, four enormous rooms were filled with his collection. 

After the Revolution, when everything he owned was sequestered by the Bolsheviks, he was put in charge of the state's first Museum of Theater and Music, situated in Ostrovsky Square.
In effect, he became the official curator of his former collection, which grew prodigiously and soon included several thousand costumes. 

Despite the deprivations to which her father was subject in those years, Ms. Geva imagines that he must have been happy to be allowed to remain with the objects he had assembled so devotedly.
While she found out soon after the war that he had perished during the Siege of Leningrad, she didn't know until the curators arrived from the Soviet Union with the contents of this exhibition that he had died of starvation on a sofa in the museum.
Though weakened by malnutrition, he was unwilling to budge in case the collection was bombed and needed to be saved. 

As it happened, the collection survived intact.
Today, the Leningrad State Museum of Theater and Music owns some 400,000 items.
For Americans, the most interesting of the 400 items on display in New York include designs by the German-born Andrei Roller (1805-91) for the Russian productions of important early 19th-century Paris ballets.
No less illuminating are the designs from Petipa's "Sleeping Beauty" (1890), "Nutcracker" (1892) and "Raymonda" (1897), which shed light on the role played by spectacle in the ballets of this great choreographer.
There also is much to be learned from the early stage photographs of Petipa's work, which, though posed, extend our knowledge of its theatrical ambiance. 

Petipa, the fountainhead of balletic classicism, emerges as the show's hero, whether perceived through scenes from his ballets or through glimpses of the dancers whose technique and artistry his choreography played a decisive role in shaping.
Among the most important of the Petipa ballerinas is Mathilde Kchessinska, represented in a series of fascinating photographs.
The mistress of Nicholas II until his engagement to Alexandra of Hesse-Darmstadt, she dominated the Imperial Ballet of St. Petersburg as much through her dancing as through her connections.
Even Isadora Duncan, the self-professed enemy of ballet, found her enchanting.
A 1910 photograph shows Kchessinska reclining on a chaise longue in her St. Petersburg mansion.
Clearly visible in the background is the balcony from which Lenin was to proclaim the Revolution. 

The Diaghilev material is less interesting.
The Ballets Russes never appeared in Russia and most of the important artifacts are in the West.
George Balanchine, to whom Ms. Geva was married as a teenager in 1923 and who began his career as an artistic revolutionary, also gets short shrift.
Better by far is the representation accorded the avant-garde dance that flourished in the U.S.S.R. until ruthlessly repressed during the Stalin years.
The presence of so much material concerning Feodor Lopukhov, the leading choreographer of the post-Revolutionary Leningrad school, and virtually unknown in this country, is particularly welcome. 

Less welcome is the random nature of the exhibition, which has no point to make beyond the indisputable fact that there are treasures in the Leningrad State Museum of Theater and Music.
Miscellaneous and haphazard -- did we really need to see Anna Pavlova's tea set or Marie Petipa's slipper? -- the show invites uninformed, and thus superficial, viewing. 

While it's an astonishing achievement for the Nakhamkin gallery to have organized the show in only three months, the time has surely come to present this kind of material in ways that reveal a context and a point of view.
Even the title is misleading: The exhibition covers ballet, not in Russia, but only in what is now Leningrad.
It also begins before 1830 and ends after 1930.
In compiling the catalog, the gallery has missed a great opportunity to document a lot of rare material.
Though well-illustrated, the publication is uninformative and often simply untrustworthy.
Clearly, no dance lover should skip the show, but it's only a stopgap for the serious, scholarly endeavor we really need. 

The show closes in New York on Oct. 20 and reopens in Saratoga, N.Y., on May 19 at the National Museum of Dance, its co-sponsor. 

