.START 

Advertising agencies' third-quarter earnings are expected to be up modestly from a year ago, securities analysts say. 

Andrew Wallach, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert, is estimating Interpublic Group, for example, at 21 cents a share, up from 18 cents a share a year ago.
Greg Ostroff, an analyst at Goldman Sachs, is pegging Omnicom Group at 17 cents a share, up from 15 cents a share, and Foote, Cone & Belding Communications Inc. at 55 cents a share, up from 46 cents. 

Analysts note, however, that the third period is a minor quarter in terms of absolute profits.
Those who watch Madison Avenue say this period, along with the first quarter, is traditionally weak.
The fourth quarter is where the real impact is made. "We tend not to read much into third-quarter earnings," Mr. Ostroff says. 

Also notable is the fact that Saatchi & Saatchi Co. and WPP Group PLC, two British giants that are principal players in the advertising business, don't report quarterly earnings. 

In the industry overall, "profits will increase unless revenues are disastrously lower," said Alan Gottesman, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc., New York. "There are no external indications" to indicate that will be the case, he said.
Mr. Gottesman noted that the employee count for the industry is down and that most agencies are watching staffing levels in a bid to closely monitor costs. 

Others are cautiously watching the value of the dollar overseas. "From where I sit, the biggest issue for the U.S. agencies is the dollar," said Emma Hill, an analyst at Wertheim Schroder & Co., New York. "For the U.S. companies, the risk is one of disappointment versus better-than-expected because of the dollar." Ad agencies rely heavily on business overseas for their bottom line.
The strength of the dollar will hurt the reporting of foreign earnings, many analysts said. 

Some agencies, including Interpublic Group's Lintas and Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates, have said that their clients are spending less than they had expected.
Few agencies are reporting that their clients' ad budgets are expanding. 

All eyes, however, are on the fourth quarter and to reporting by the giant British companies. "Saatchi & Saatchi is having a very tough year," Drexel Burnham's Mr. Wallach said. "It's real guesswork figuring out what they'll earn." That agency, rumored as a takeover candidate, earlier this year said pretax profit for 1989 would trail 1988's already disappointing level.
For WPP Group, on the other hand, most analysts are looking for margin improvement and good results considering its acquisition earlier this year of Ogilvy Group. 

