.START 

The market for $200 billion of high-risk junk bonds, battered by a succession of defaults and huge price declines this year, practically vanished Friday. 

Trading ground to a halt as investors rushed to sell bonds, only to find themselves deserted by potential buyers.
Stunned, they watched brokerage houses mark down price quotations on their junk holdings while being able to execute very few actual trades. 

"The junk bond market is in a state of gridlock now -- there are no bids, only offers," says independent investor Martin D. Sass, who manages nearly $4 billion and who recently decided to buy distressed securities for a new fund.
This calamity is "far from over," he says. 

Junk's collapse helped stoke the panicky selling of stocks that produced the deepest one-day dive in the Dow Jones Industrial Average since the Oct. 19, 1987, crash.
Simultaneously, it also helped trigger this year's biggest rally in the U.S. government bond market as investors rushed to move capital into the highest-quality securities they could find. 

But "an eerie silence pervaded" the junk market Friday as prices tumbled on hundreds of high-yield bonds despite "no active trading," says John Lonski, an economist at Moody's Investors Service Inc.
For example, the price of Southland Corp. 's $500 million of 16 3/4% bonds due 2002 -- sold less than two years ago by Goldman, Sachs & Co. -- plummeted 25% to just 30 cents on the dollar.
But not even Goldman would make a market in the securities of Southland, the owner of the nationwide chain of 7-11 convenience stores that is strapped for cash.
Goldman officials declined to comment. 

Junk bonds, which mushroomed from less than $2 billion at the start of this decade, have been declining for months as issuer after issuer sank beneath the weight of hefty interest payments.
The shaky market received its biggest jolt last month from Campeau Corp., which created its U.S. retailing empire with junk financing.
Campeau developed a cash squeeze that caused it to be tardy on some interest payments and to put its prestigious Bloomingdales department-store chain up for sale. 

Now, dozens of corporations, including Ethan Allen, TW Services and York International, that are counting on at least $7 billion of scheduled new junk financings to keep their highly leveraged takeovers and buy-outs afloat, may never get the money. "The music has stopped playing," says Michael Harkins, a principal in the investment firm of Levy Harkins. "You've either got a chair or you don't." 

In Friday's aftermath, says R. Douglas Carleton, a director of high-yield finance at First Boston Corp., "much of the $7 billion forward calendar could be deferred, depending on the hysteria." In August, First Boston withdrew a $475 million junk offering of Ohio Mattress bonds because potential buyers were "very skittish." 

The outlook "looks shaky because we're still waiting" for mutual funds, in particular, to dump some of their junk bond holdings to pay off redemptions by individual investors, says King Penniman, senior vice president at McCarthy, Crisanti & Maffei, an investment arm of Xerox Financial Services.
Indeed, a Moody's index that tracks the net asset values of 24 high-yield mutual funds declined for the 17th consecutive day Friday. 

In a stark contrast, the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond climbed more than 2 1/2 points, or about $25 for each $1,000 face amount, to 103 12/32, its biggest gain of the year.
The bond's yield dropped to 7.82%, the lowest since March 31, 1987, according to Technical Data Global Markets Group.
The yield on three-month Treasury bills, considered the safest of all investments, plummeted about 0.7 percentage point to 7.16%, the largest one-day decline since 1982. 

The main catalyst for government bond market rally was the 190.58-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. "When you get panic in one market, you get flight to quality in the other," said Maria Ramirez, money market economist at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 

Nevertheless, the problems of the junk market could prompt the Federal Reserve to ease credit in the months ahead. "This marks a significant shift in the interest rate outlook," says William Sullivan, director of money market research at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., New York. 

Any sustained credit-easing could be a lift for junk bonds as well as other securities.
Robert Dow, a partner and portfolio manager at Lord, Abbett & Co., which manages $4 billion of high-yield bonds, says he doesn't "think there is any fundamental economic rationale {for the junk bond rout}.
It was herd instinct." 

He adds: "The junk market has witnessed some trouble and now some people think that if the equity market gets creamed that means the economy will be terrible and that's bad for junk.
I don't believe that's the case, but I believe that people are running scared.
There is a flight to quality, and the quality is not in equities and not in junk -- it's in Treasurys." 

Even as trading in high-yield issues dried up over the past month, corporations sold more than $2 billion of new junk bonds.
For example, a recent $375 million offering of Petrolane Gas Services L.P. bonds sold by First Boston was three times oversubscribed.
A $550 million offering of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. high-yield securities sold last week by Drexel was increased $50 million because of strong demand. 

First Boston estimates that in November and December alone, junk bond investors will receive $4.8 billion of coupon interest payments. "That's a clear indication that there is and will be an undercurrent of basic business going on," says Mr. Carleton of First Boston. 

"I don't know how people can say the junk bond market disappeared when there were $1.5 billion of orders for $550 million of junk bonds sold last week by Turner," says Raymond Minella, co-head of merchant banking at Merrill Lynch & Co. "When the rally comes, insurance companies will be leading it because they have billions to invest and invest they will.
There is plenty of money available from people who want to buy well-structured deals; it's the stuff that's financed on a shoestring that people are wary of." 

But such highly leveraged transactions seemed to have multiplied this year, casting a pall over much of the junk market.
Michael McNamara, director of fixed-income research at Kemper Financial Services, says the quality of junk issues has been getting poorer, contributing to the slide in prices. 

"Last year we probably bought one out of every three new deals," he says. "This year, at best, it's in one in every five or six.
And our credit standards haven't changed one iota." However, Mr. McNamara said the slide in junk is creating "one hell of a buying opportunity" for selective buyers. 

For the moment, investors seem more preoccupied with the "bad" junk than the "good" junk. "The market has been weak since" the announcement of the Campeau cash squeeze and the company's subsequent bailout by Olympia & York, says Mr. Minella of Merrill Lynch. "That really affected the market in that people started to ask 'What else is in trouble? '" 

Well before Campeau, though, there were signs that the junk market was stumbling through one of its worst years ever.
Despite the relatively strong economy, junk bond prices did nothing except go down, hammered by a seemingly endless trail of bad news: 

-- In June, two months before it would default on interest payments covering some of its $1.2 billion of speculative debt securities, New York-based Integrated Resources Inc. said it ran out of borrowed money. 

-- In July, Southmark Corp., the Dallas-based real estate and financial services company with about $1.3 billion of junk bonds, voluntarily filed for protection under U.S. bankruptcy law. -- By the end of July, the difference in yield between an index of junk bonds and seven-year Treasury notes widened to more than 5.5 percentage points. 

-- In August, Resorts International Inc., which sold more than $500 million of junk bonds, suspended interest payments. 

-- In September, just as the cash squeeze hit Campeau, Lomas Financial Corp. defaulted on $145 million of notes and appeared unlikely to pay interest on a total of $1.2 billion of debt securities. 

Meantime, regulators are becoming increasingly worried as the rush to leverage shows no signs of abating.
Moody's says the frequency of corporate credit downgrades is the highest this year since 1982.
In addition, there are six times as many troubled banks as there were in the recession of 1981, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. 

"The era of the 1980s is about compound interest and the reaching for it," says James Grant, editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer, an early critic of the junk bond market. "What we've begun to see is the damage to businesses of paying exorbitant compound interest.
Businesses were borrowing at interest rates higher than their own earnings.
What we're seeing now is the wrenching readjustment of asset values to a future when speculative-grade debt will be hard to obtain rather than easy." 

Friday's Market Activity 

Prices of Treasury bonds surged in the biggest rally of the year as investors fled a plummeting stock market. 

The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond was quoted 6 p.m. EDT at 103 12/32, compared with 100 27/32 Thursday, up 2 1/2 points.
The yield on the benchmark fell to 7.82%, the lowest since March 31, 1987, according to Technical Data Global Markets Group. 

The "flight to quality" began late in the day and followed a precipitous fall in the stock market.
Treasurys opened lower, reacting negatively to news that the producer price index -- a measure of inflation on the wholesale level -- accelerated in September.
Bond prices barely budged until midday. 

Many bond market participants will be closely eying the action of the Federal Reserve, which might repeat its October 1987 injection of huge amounts of liquidity to buoy the financial markets and keep the economy from slowing into a recession. 

Prices of municipals, investment-grade corporates and mortgage-backed bonds also rose, but lagged behind their Treasury counterparts. 

Mortgage securities rose in hectic trading, with most of the activity concentrated in Government National Mortgage Association 9% coupon securities, the most liquid mortgage issue. 

The Ginnie Mae November 9% issue ended at 98 25/32, up 7/8 point on the day, to yield about 9.28% to a 12-year average life assumption. 

Investment-grade corporate bonds were up about 1/2 to 3/4 point.
But the yield spread between lower-quality, investment-grade issues and higher-quality bonds widened. 

And the yields on telephone and utility issues rose relative to other investment-grade bonds in anticipation of this week's $3 billion bond offering by the Tennessee Valley Authority. 

Despite rumors that the TVA's long-awaited offering would be postponed because of the debacle in the equity markets, sources in the underwriting syndicate said they expect the issue will be priced as scheduled. 

One of the sources said the smaller portions of $750 million each of five-year and 10-year bonds have already been "substantially oversubscribed." 

Municipal bonds rose as much as 3/4 point. 

Roger Lowenstein contributed to this article. 

