.START 

The European Community and Switzerland signed a treaty granting reciprocal access to their markets for most kinds of insurance products and services. 

The accord is an example "of the kind of relations the community wishes to develop with its European partners," said Edith Cresson, the French minister for European affairs who presided over a recent EC Council of Ministers meeting. 

As European partners, Mrs. Cresson cited in particular the members of the European Free Trade Association, composed of Switzerland, Austria, Sweden, Norway, Finland and Iceland. 

EC and association ministers are scheduled to meet Dec. 19 to discuss economic cooperation.
Mrs. Cresson said she hopes the talks will show "a common resolve to go beyond bilateral, sectorial agreements," such as the one just signed with Switzerland. 

Swiss President Jean-Pascal Delamuraz said the insurance pact could "pioneer" a broader agreement between the Community and the association. 

The treaty allows Swiss insurance companies to open branches in the EC, and vice versa, without restriction.
But it doesn't permit selling insurance across borders without establishing branches.
The treaty needs to be approved by the European Parliament, which is expected to endorse the measure, EC officials said. 

The agreement, which had been 16 years in the making, covers general-insurance services and excludes life insurance and reinsurance.
Because Swiss and EC insurers are widely present on each other's markets, the accord isn't expected to substantially increase near-term competition. 

An important element in the accord, EC officials said, is a clause that provides for bilateral consultations when one party decides to modify its internal insurance legislation.
A joint panel would decide whether the changes are compatible with the treaty or whether the treaty needs to be amended to cope with the changes. 

Mrs. Cresson said a similar clause could be useful in future accords between the EC and other countries. 

