.START 

Part of a Series} 

Marlene Dash would appear to be a marketer's dream come true.
The corporate manager likes to dress smartly, both on and off the job.
She owns a condominium in Chicago and takes pride in furnishing it well. 

Yet Ms. Dash, in her mid-30s, loathes shopping.
Lousy service and poor selections at many stores have turned a once favorite pastime into what she calls a "frustrating" experience.
These days, she would rather exercise, visit friends or read. "If you don't make it reasonably easy for me," she says of shopping, "I'm not going to waste my time." 

Ms. Dash is far from alone.
Shopping has become such a chore that more people hate browsing in stores than hate doing household work, according to The Wall Street Journal's "American Way of Buying" survey.
Nearly a third of the 2,064 people interviewed by the pollster Peter D. Hart Research Associates said they "do not enjoy at all" window-shopping or browsing.
Yankelovich, Clancy, Shulman, a market research firm in Westport, Conn., warns clients that Americans' love affair with shopping is on the rocks: More than half the women it has surveyed in recent years, and an even larger percentage of men, say shopping for clothes is a hassle. 

Stressed-out consumers -- juggling jobs, families and leisure activities -- feel they have less time to shop.
They also complain about obnoxious and poorly trained salespeople, lower quality merchandise and exorbitant prices. 

But underlying these complaints is a more far-reaching change: For many shoppers, the thrill is gone. 

Back in the 1970s, when malls were sprouting across the country, consumers were content to browse away an afternoon and buy whatever struck their fancy.
Then in the early 1980s, Americans viewed shopping as a quest for the trendiest merchandise or the best bargains they could brag about to their friends. 

Now, on the eve of the 1990s, consumer researchers say that for most people, shopping is simply less fun.
Retailers hawk look-alike merchandise in stores that are numbingly similar in appearance.
Shopping has become "just one of the activities that we have to do," says Susan Hayward of Yankelovich. "It's not an end in itself anymore." 

In the Journal poll, more than a third of the people interviewed said they probably wouldn't spend a free hour poking around in stores, even if a prime shopping district were nearby. 

That isn't to say consumers don't like new things.
But when they go to a store today, they're more likely to think of the trip as a mission rather than an adventure. "They're buyers as opposed to shoppers," says Thomas Rauh, a retail consultant at the accounting firm of Ernst & Young. 

Surveys and focus-group research show that most people are indeed shopping more purposefully.
Consumers visit fewer stores per trip (an average of three last year, down from 3.6 in 1982, according to consultant Stillerman Jones & Co.) and spend less time in malls (an average of 68 minutes per trip last year, down from 90 minutes in 1982). "I leave rather than hunt for something," snaps Lisa Max, a 46-year-old real estate broker in New York. 

Despite such negative attitudes, retailers generally say consumers aren't cutting back on what they buy. "If it is dropping off, it would be more likely that they're shopping less often and buying more when they do shop," says Michael Wellman, vice president of marketing at K mart Corp. 

"There's no question our customers' time has become more valuable than ever," says Stephen Watson, chairman and chief executive officer of Dayton Hudson Corp. 's department store unit.
But he contends the company's record sales and profits indicate it is making the shopping experience easier.
For example, the company is hiring more sales people than in the past and paying them more.
It also is laying out remodeled and new stores with a center-aisle design and installing escalators and elevators in more convenient central locations. 

Of course, there are still people for whom shopping is a joy, even a passion.
But some of those people have complaints, too.
Take Cyd Hinman, a mother of two from Norwood, Mass.
She often enjoys shopping, but is so fed up with the clerks at a nearby Filene's department store that she refers to them as "idiots." 

Twice, Mrs. Hinman picked merchandise off Filene's racks labeled with "sale" signs, only to be told when she got to the cash register that the goods weren't on special.
The second time, she demanded that she receive the discount anyway, and the clerk gave in. "I'm willing to spend a lot of money," she says, "but not if I feel like I'm getting jerked around." 

Complaints about service are so widespread that six of 10 people in the Journal survey said they have boycotted stores because of the way they were treated.
The percentage was even higher -- roughly three-quarters -- among professionals and those earning more than $50,000 a year. 

Service has declined just at a time when consumers are more impatient than ever. "The whole tone of voice is different now in terms of what people expect from a store," says William Ress, whose Columbus, Ohio, management consulting firm has surveyed consumers for more than 20 years. 

Despite the rising resentment, few stores are making shopping more appealing.
Sales people spraying perfume still assault shoppers at many department stores, even though some consumers complain that the spritzers could provide a far more useful service if they were trained to operate a cash register. 

Consumers want selection to be easy and efficient, but that's not what most merchandisers want.
Retailers generally go to lengths to keep shoppers in their stores as long as possible.
Many stores, for example, require customers to walk through a maze of boutiques designed to show off their wares just to find, say, a simple white blouse.
But rather than tempt people to buy more, consumer researchers say, this tactic just irritates many shoppers.
Over half the respondents in the Journal survey said they rarely buy on impulse anyway. 

So what should a retailer do? "Those that do the best job of making the shopping experience enjoyable and making the customer feel like a human being are very well rewarded," says Leo J. Shapiro, a market researcher in Chicago. 

He cites Nordstrom Inc., the Seattle-based department store.
The chain's strategy: pay sales people an incentive to provide good service and keep more merchandise in stock than competitors. 

Other retailers are trying to mollify miffed shoppers by doing away with their decades-old practice of setting high "regular" prices that can later be cut to "sale" levels.
Under a new approach being hyped as "everyday low pricing," retailers such as Sears, Roebuck & Co. now run fewer sales.
Instead, they set prices between their old "sale" and "regular" prices. 

Last month, R.H. Macy & Co. started promising in ads that shoppers in search of women's coats could "cut through all the confusing sales, special buys and clearances out there" and pay what Macy's says is the "lowest prices . . . every day." 

Sears started its "everyday pricing" approach in March, but so far sales results don't reflect strong consumer response. 

Still, such a pricing strategy just might appeal to people like Connie Bates, a respondent in the Journal survey.
She recently walked out of a furniture store because the salesman offered to cut the price of a sectional couch three times.
When a store keeps dropping prices, the Farmington, Mich., resident says, "I get suspicious that they're trying to get the most they can out of you." 

(See related story: "Diehards Say The Experience Feels Too Good" -- WSJ Oct. 13, 1989) 

