.START 

I was profoundly moved by the incongruity of modern American life illustrated by your Sept. 20 page-one article "Country Doctor: How a Physician Solved Riddle of Rare Disease in Children of Amish." 

Here is a young man who honestly understands what being a physician means and what it requires.
It requires delivering quality medical care to those in need.
It requires doing the utmost within oneself to alleviate the illness and suffering of others.
The physician providing such care derives his reward from being fulfilled as a provider, and from realistic charges for his care. 

Though Holmes Morton fulfills the "requirements" for being a true physician, our so-called sophisticated society and its medical system fail to appreciate the value of such a dedicated physician.
Otherwise, why is there not a rush of funds from medical circles or the related medical-support industry -- i.e. pharmaceutical companies, etc. -- or, most significantly, from all of us to support this doctor and his patients, to support a clinic to further the work of resolving human suffering? 

Ted Ferrier Jr. 

Dallas 

Having grown up among the Amish in Iowa, I think I can appreciate more than most the difficulty of Dr. Morton's work.
The average person can hardly imagine the suspicion, bred by centuries of isolation and persecution, among the Amish toward outsiders and things modern.
This, in my experience, is particularly true of their attitude toward modern medicine.
Dr. Morton's success is not only a measure of the outstanding quality of his work, but also of the desperation the Amish must feel in the face of this horrendous disease. 

Sadly, the article also contains a profound statement about the current state of academe, the professions in particular and American society in general.
Some experts were quoted as speculating on the detrimental effects of Dr. Morton's work on his career.
According to these experts, he will find it difficult to get grants and will lose access to sophisticated laboratories.
They point out that he "will be, at best, on the very outer circle." As a marginal academic myself, I thought we were at least discreet enough to keep our real concerns hidden behind our academic robes and in our faculty cliques. 

We can only hope that more people will choose to be "on the very outer circle." 

James E. Groff 

Associate Professor 

University of Texas at San Antonio 

San Antonio 

How very refreshing to read about Dr. Morton after all the articles about the Boeskys, Millkens, Icahns, Trumps and such like; about S&L officials and self-seeking officials and legislators, federal and state; about corporate executives whose sole concern is the "bottom line," all of which lead to the conclusion that as a society we have a woeful sense of values and give no thought to what "life is all about." Here is an individual to be greatly admired and respected. 

Sandro Mayer 

Fishkill, N.Y. 

