.START 

The economy's temperature will be taken from several vantage points this week, with readings on trade, output, housing and inflation. 

The most troublesome report may be the August merchandise trade deficit due out tomorrow.
The trade gap is expected to widen to about $9 billion from July's $7.6 billion, according to a survey by MMS International, a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc., New York. 

Thursday's report on the September consumer price index is expected to rise, although not as sharply as the 0.9% gain reported Friday in the producer price index.
That gain was being cited as a reason the stock market was down early in Friday's session, before it got started on its reckless 190-point plunge. 

Economists are divided as to how much manufacturing strength they expect to see in September reports on industrial production and capacity utilization, also due tomorrow.
Meanwhile, September housing starts, due Wednesday, are thought to have inched upward. 

"There's a possibility of a surprise" in the trade report, said Michael Englund, director of research at MMS.
A widening of the deficit, if it were combined with a stubbornly strong dollar, would exacerbate trade problems -- but the dollar weakened Friday as stocks plummeted. 

In any event, Mr. Englund and many others say that the easy gains in narrowing the trade gap have already been made. "Trade is definitely going to be more politically sensitive over the next six or seven months as improvement begins to slow," he said. 

Exports are thought to have risen strongly in August, but probably not enough to offset the jump in imports, economists said. 

Views on manufacturing strength are split between economists who read September's low level of factory job growth as a sign of a slowdown and those who use the somewhat more comforting total employment figures in their calculations.
The wide range of estimates for the industrial output number underscores the differences: The forecasts run from a drop of 0.5% to an increase of 0.4%, according to MMS. 

A rebound in energy prices, which helped push up the producer price index, is expected to do the same in the consumer price report.
The consensus view expects a 0.4% increase in the September CPI after a flat reading in August. 

Robert H. Chandross, an economist for Lloyd's Bank in New York, is among those expecting a more moderate gain in the CPI than in prices at the producer level. "Auto prices had a big effect in the PPI, and at the CPI level they won't," he said. 

Food prices are expected to be unchanged, but energy costs jumped as much as 4%, said Gary Ciminero, economist at Fleet/Norstar Financial Group.
He also says he thinks "core inflation," which excludes the volatile food and energy prices, was strong last month.
He expects a gain of as much as 0.5% in core inflation after a summer of far smaller increases. 

Housing starts are expected to quicken a bit from August's annual pace of 1,350,000 units.
Economists say an August rebound in permits for multifamily units signaled an increase in September starts, though activity remains fairly modest by historical standards. 

