.START 

The nation's biggest beverage companies are expected to report stronger third-quarter earnings, even as the soft-drink giants take their lumps from higher domestic soda prices and brewers' struggle with flat industry volume. 

Coca-Cola Co., the first of the group to report, said yesterday that earnings rose 10%, excluding a gain from the sale of a bottled water business.
PepsiCo Inc. and Anheuser-Busch Cos. will report third-quarter earnings gains of at least 9% and 14%, respectively, while results for Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. and Adolph Coors Co. will decline, analysts estimate. 

Since the summer, soft-drink companies have been trying to extract themselves from a price-slashing war designed to steal market share from each other.
The battle drove up volumes for several years, but the discounted prices have squeezed bottlers' profit margins.
Because raw material costs have been escalating and because Coke and Pepsi have become bigger owners of bottling businesses, the companies have been raising soda pop prices in recent months. 

That, along with generally cooler, rainier weather this year, has slowed the industry's volume growth.
Unlike the 4% to 5% growth rate of recent years, the soft-drink industry is expected to report third-quarter volume was, at worst, flat, and at best, up only 3%.
That's a fairly wide range, given the sheer size of the $42 billion soft-drink industry. 

But analysts, and indeed, some of the soda companies, have had difficulty predicting consumer reaction to higher prices.
In August, Coca-Cola Enterprises, Coke's largest bottling operation, said its 1989 earnings would fall as much as 37%, partly because it misjudged consumer resistance to the new prices, which were 2% to 3% higher on average in July and August.
Blaming higher prices in part, Coca-Cola said its third-quarter unit case sales were flat. 

The volume in the summer selling season suffered, too, from the lack of a critical, yet intangible, element in the softdrink industry: excitement.
After a controversial flap involving a Madonna music video, Pepsi dropped its plans for a big summer advertising promotion featuring the pop singer.
And there have been no major new product introductions, such as cherry-flavored soft drinks, which made sales sizzle two years ago. 

"What's been hot in the soft-drink business lately?" asks Emanuel Goldman, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. "Nothing." 

Still, the beverage industry's slower results in the latest quarter could lead to some positive earnings surprises in next year's third quarter, when comparisons will be easier, said George Thompson, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. "This year's ugly ducklings will be next year's swans," he said. 

Coca-Cola's earnings were stronger primarily because of sharply improved volume from the company's international operations, which account for the bulk of its business.
Volume rose 14%, well ahead of analysts' 10% to 11% projections for the business. 

Analysts are looking for Pepsi to earn as much as $1.04 a share, with most estimates settling around 99 cents, compared with 91 cents in the year-ago quarter.
The latest quarter results, are expected to be a little soft compared with Pepsi's historical earnings growth rate, reflecting some dilution for snack-food and soft-drink bottling acquisitions.
Stronger restaurant and snack-food sales helped boost Pepsi's profits, too, analysts said. 

Anheuser-Busch is expected to report third-quarter earnings between 89 cents and 92 cents a share, compared with 78 cents a year earlier.
On the strength of Bud Light, Busch and Michelob Dry, the company's volume in the quarter is estimated to increase about 3% to 4%, while the rest of the industry will be flat, or up slightly.
Coors earnings are expected to fall, as its volume declines perhaps 3% to 4%.
Coors is expected to achieve greater production efficiencies once it completes its plan, announced last month, to acquire most of the beer-related assets of Stroh Brewery Co. 

