.START 

The tug of war between Warner Communications Inc. and Sony Corp. over movie producers Peter Guber and Jon Peters has exploded into a legal battle that could prove an embarrassing setback to Sony's plans to enter the U.S. movie business. 

On Friday, after two weeks of fruitless settlement talks, Warner filed suit in Los Angeles Superior Court against Sony and Guber Peters Entertainment Co., charging Sony with inducing the two producers to breach a five-year contract with Warner.
The suit seeks $1 billion in damages and an injunction barring Messrs.
Guber and Peters from taking the top management posts at Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc.
As previously reported, Sony has agreed to pay $3.4 billion to acquire Columbia and separately has agreed to pay $200 million for Guber Peters Entertainment to obtain the services of its two co-chief executives. 

Sony and Guber Peters promptly countersued, charging Warner with attempting to interfere in Sony's acquisition of the two companies and with falsely asserting that the Guber Peters agreement with Warner prevents them from accepting the senior management posts at Columbia. 

At issue in the lawsuits is the contract signed last March by Messrs.
Guber and Peters that requires the two to make movies exclusively for Warner for the next five years.
Sony and Messrs.
Guber and Peters maintain that the contract doesn't prohibit taking an executive post at another studio.
Moreover, they assert, the producers have an oral agreeement with Warner Bros. studio executives that gives them the right to "terminate the producer relationship in the event they were given and chose to accept the opportunity to become senior executives of a motion picture studio," according to their countersuit. 

Warner, for its part, maintains that the written agreement prevents Messrs.
Guber and Peters from doing anything else in the motion picture business.
Warner says in its suit that Sony "has unethically and illegally sought to steal the services of Guber and Peters and injure Warner as a major competitor of Columbia." Moreover, Warner says, Sony enticed the producers with "unprecedented financial rewards to breach their binding contractual commitments to Warner." Warner also names in its suit the two producers, Sony Corp. of America Vice Chairman Michael Schulof, and Walter Yetnikoff, head of Sony's CBS Records unit. 

Sony responded in its countersuit by charging Warner, its chief executive Steven J. Ross, and Warner Bros. unit chairman Robert Daly and President Terry Semel with embarking on an unlawful scheme to interfere with and disrupt Sony's acquisitions.
Warner, which is in the process of being acquired by Time Warner Inc., is attempting to "sabotage" Sony's efforts as part of a "plan and scheme to dominate and control the entertainment business," the countersuit from Sony and Guber Peters adds. 

Warner also appears to be trying to embarrass Sony by accusing the Japanese company's U.S executives, Messrs.
Schulof and Yetnikoff, of dishonorable dealings.
In its suit, Warner says that Mr. Ross warned Sony's Mr. Schulof on Sept. 26 at a dinner in Washington, "with Guber Peters in mind" that in the U.S. "it is essential that corporations honor written contracts and do not induce breach of contracts by others." Sony went ahead the next day anyway and executed its own five-year agreement with the producers and agreed to buy their company, the suit adds.
Moreover, the suit adds that Sony initially said it wouldn't buy Guber Peters unless the Warner contract was settled.
On Tuesday, although a settlement wasn't reached, Sony publicly announced it would acquire Guber Peters. "Sony has thus knowingly and willfully, and over Warner's protests, induced Guber and Peters to repudiate their contract with Warner," the suit says. 

Warner's decision to file suit in the wake of its failure to reach a settlement with Sony didn't surprise executives at rival studios, who say Warner is only protecting its own interests.
The outcome of the legal battle, they add, could redefine contractual relationships in Hollywood, where the unwritten rule has often been that contracts were made to be broken. 

In Warner's case, the studio obviously regards the relationship with Guber Peters as a crucial factor in Warner's recent success and a central part of its future plans.
Warner has relied heavily on the two to find and produce movies for the studio, including this summer's hit "Batman." Warner says in its suit that "Guber and Peters claim to have generated over one-half billion dollars in profits for Warner from combined projects," a claim Warner doesn't dispute.
And Warner says it is currently financing about 50 new projects being developed by the two producers. 

Under an earlier agreement with Warner, the producers were allowed to make movies elsewhere.
For example, they made the hit "Rainman" for MGM/UA Communications Co.
But when Warner signed a new agreement with the two in March, the terms specifically prohibited them from serving as producers or executive producers of movies for any other studio. 

Sony and the Guber Peters executives say in their countersuit, however, that the new contract eliminated language barring the two from serving "in any other capacity" in the motion picture business.
And they appear to be relying heavily on an alleged "oral agreement" the two producers claim to have with Warner that would let them out of their written contract in the event that an actual executive post at another company became available.
In their countersuit, they say that on two previous occasions -- once in 1987 when they considered a post at Columbia, and once when Messrs.
Guber and Peters tried to buy a stake in MGM/UA in 1988 -- Warner was prepared to release them from their contract.
The countersuit also charges Warner with making the oral agreement to "falsely induce" them into a new written contract in 1989.
Moreover, they say, Warner is trying to cheat them out of "a unique business opportunity" and the fulfilment of their "long-term dream" to run their own studio. 

But entertainment industry executives say that the new contract was signed after Guber Peters efforts to take over MGM failed and that Warner may argue in court that the producers' willingness to sign a new long-term contract signaled the end of their search for a movie studio. 

Mr. Ross and his team at Warner appear to view the move by the two producers to Sony as a personal betrayal after years of support and friendship. "Warner has been nurturing its relationship with Guber and Peters since 1972, long before their recent success," the Warner suit says.
That success, the suit adds, "is due in large measure to the trust and confidence that Warner has reposed in these producers, even in the early years of the relationship when the creative partnership was not particularly profitable for Warner." 

Warner, whose executives are the highest paid in the entertainment industry, also charges that Sony induced the two producers to breach their Warner contract by offering them "the most lucrative and expensive package of financial inducements in the film industry," including $2.7 million each in annual salary, deferred compensation of $50 million, as much as 10% of Columbia's cash flow, and as much as 8% of the future appreciation of Columbia's market value.
The producers also stand to get more than $50 million from their combined 28% stake in Guber Peters Entertainment from Sony's $200 million offer for the company. 

In their countersuit, Messrs.
Guber and Peters say they seek $100 million in damages initially from Warner but may seek a higher amount later after determining the extent of damages. 

