.START 

The dollar drifted lower in indecisive trading, its strength sapped by concern that the Federal Reserve is gently easing monetary policy. 

Despite reserve-draining operations by the Fed yesterday and on the three preceding business days, some analysts say the central bank is subtly relaxing credit. 

They say the Fed's draining operations have been necessary to address a seasonal surfeit of reserves, but note that the actions haven't been tough enough to prevent the federal funds rate from easing to about 8 3/4% from its recent level of 9%.
The federal funds rate is the overnight rate banks charge each other. 

"They're draining in a consistently less aggressive manner and at a lower level," said James T. McGroarty, a senior vice president at Greenwich Capital Markets. 

But others analysts say opinion differs markedly on whether the Fed is softening its credit stance, noting that the market's muted reaction reflects this division. 

"We just don't know enough yet to definitively say that the Fed has eased . . . the fed funds rate still is in a band around 9%," said one economist. 

Speculation that the Fed would sharply ease its credit reins was damped earlier this week when Chairman Alan Greenspan said central banks shouldn't focus too much on intermediate goals for exchange rates and interest rates. 

In late New York trading Thursday, the dollar was quoted at 1.9083 marks, down from 1.9166 marks late Wednesday, and at 144.17 yen, down from 144.57 yen late Wednesday.
Sterling was quoted at $1.5523, up from $1.5463. 

In Tokyo Friday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 143.60 yen, down from Thursday's Tokyo close of 144.60 yen. 

Many foreign exchange traders remain skeptical that a credit-softening is in the offing.
They plan to look for clues in two economic indicators due out today, one on the producer-price index and the other on retail sales, both for September. 

"The market believes PPI will confirm Greenspan's concern about inflation," said Francoise Soares-Kemp, a vice president with Credit Suisse in New York.
She said the market has already reacted to "that particular prompting" and is unlikely to bid the dollar significantly higher. 

Higher energy and auto prices are expected to have pushed producer prices up 0.3% in September after declining in August and July.
Retail sales are expected to have remained flat in September, according to economists, following gains of 0.7% in August and 0.5% in July. 

A long-awaited speech by British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson failed to bolster the flagging pound and left many market participants with a decidedly bearish view of sterling. 

Vowing to continue his government's strategy of combating inflation with high interest rates, Mr. Lawson told the Conservative Party conference that the battle to rein in inflation required a strong currency.
The Tories are "not the party of devaluation," he said. 

But Mr. Lawson failed to outline specific policy changes or say how the British government planned to support the beleaguered pound.
He also avoided any mention of when London would bring sterling into the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System, and warned there are "no easy answers" to Britain's economic problems. 

Some market analysts see early entry into the EMS exchange rate mechanism as one of the few alternatives left for stabilizing the pound.
But entry has been opposed by Prime Minister Thatcher, who insists Britain should join from a position of strength. 

Wednesday's discount rate increase in Japan continued to dominate trading in Tokyo, with dealers trying to guess what the Bank of Japan and the Fed will do following the failure of the rate boost to depress the dollar. 

The Bank of Japan entered the market several times in the morning to sell dollars for yen, traders said.
European dealings were dominated by cross activity, highlighted by sterling. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $363.40 an ounce, up $1.40.
Estimated volume was a light 2.2 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Friday, gold was quoted at $363.35 an ounce. 

