.START 

As India gears up for general elections to be held by January, television is emerging as a powerful political tool -- and a highly controversial one. 

Television is beamed into 74% of the country's villages, up from 49% during the 1984 general-election campaign.
The government hopes to get broadcasts into all of India's 57,500 villages eventually. 

But the government is essentially the only broadcaster.
It controls the sole national TV network, Doordarshan, and the only national radio system, All India Radio.
TV news coverage has generally favored the government. 

In recent months, however, critics say the coverage has been so biased toward Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and his ruling Congress (I) Party that what is labeled news is merely propaganda.
With the elections approaching, critics say the manipulation of such an influential medium poses a threat to India's democratic traditions. 

"In a country with our measure of literacy, television is becoming a serious impediment in the way of free and fair elections," says Lal Krishna Advani, an opposition-party leader and a former minister of information and broadcasting. "It tilts the balance totally in favor of the ruling party." 

But Kamal Kant Tewary, minister for information and broadcasting, says: "We are the elected representatives of the people, and we will do whatever we think is fit and in the interests of the people." 

There is general agreement on one point: The elections are likely to be the most uncertain since 1967.
Many say Mr. Gandhi and Congress (I), with seesawing popularity and an arms scandal that has tarnished the government, stand a chance of losing power.
The arms scandal involves a report by India's comptroller and auditor general, which cited lapses in the government's evaluation and purchase of artillery guns from a Swedish arms company. 

Television came to India in 1965, when black-and-white broadcasts began in New Delhi.
Broadcasts to other cities didn't start until 1972, and color broadcasts debuted just seven years ago. 

In 1980, the country had 1.6 million TV sets; today there are 20 million.
That's a small number for a nation of 800 million people, but a single set might have much of a village for its audience.
A sizable portion of illiterate Indians now rely on television for news they used to hear third or fourth hand, if at all. 

Doordarshan is controlled by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and often takes orders directly from the prime minister's office, some Doordarshan staff members contend. 

According to critics, the shift in Doordarshan's news coverage from generally favoring the government to outright bias began in May.
From around that time, the critics say, items on Mr. Gandhi and Congress (I) have increasingly dominated the nationwide evening news and have been overwhelmingly positive, while the opposition has been given short shrift or blatantly abused. 

In May, a Doordarshan news bulletin quoted excerpts from a newspaper article by an opposition leader.
The article criticized both the government and the opposition, but Doordarshan aired only the parts criticizing the opposition.
This was merely news judgment, says Mr. Tewary, the information and broadcasting minister. 

In the same month, a group of politicians circulated a photo of a top opposition leader, Ajit Singh, socializing with an alleged drug smuggler.
Newspapers carried the photo on their front pages.
Doordarshan showed it on the nationwide news broadcast.
The next day, a different group of politicians produced a photo of Mr. Gandhi standing next to the same alleged drug smuggler.
Newspapers again gave it front-page play.
Doordarshan ignored it.
Mr. Tewary says the prime minister is photographed with many people and that therefore the photograph wasn't news. 

But a senior reporter at All India Radio, who declines to be identified, says: "We get orders from a chain of people.
We are a government news agency and are expected to project the government." 

For all the criticism of what is seen as government propaganda, many media experts say it could be counterproductive.
Says Probhat Chandra Chatterji, one of the pioneers of Indian broadcasting and a former director-general of All India Radio and Doordarshan: "It is debatable whether this propaganda will bring votes to the government.
By and large, people think that it will turn the people away." 

