.START 

Coldwell Banker Commercial Group said it sold $47 million of common stock to its employees at $10 a share, giving them a total stake of more than 40% in the commercial real estate brokerage firm. 

The firm, which was acquired in April from Sears, Roebuck & Co. in a management-led buy-out, had planned to sell up to $56.4 million of stock, or a 50% stake in the company, to its 5,000 employees. 

Though the offering didn't sell out, James J. Didion, chairman and chief executive officer, said, "We're pretty proud of the employees' response." He noted that unlike an employee stock ownership plan, where a company usually borrows money from third party lenders to buy stock that it sets aside to award employees over time, here employees had to fork out their own cash for the stock. "They came up with their own money instead of borrowed money," Mr. Didion said. "It's totally different." 

He said the offering was designed to create long-term incentives for employees. "We're in a service business, and in that context, it's vital to have your employees involved in the ownership so they have a stake in the success." The brokerage firm won't pay a dividend on the stock. 

Employees have the right to trade stock among themselves, and the company will establish an internal clearing house for these transactions.
They may also eventually sell the shares to third parties, but the outside investors who own the remaining 60% of Coldwell Banker have the right to first refusal. 

Those outside investors in Coldwell Banker include Carlyle Group, a closely held Washington, D.C., merchant banking firm whose co-chairman is Frank Carlucci, former secretary of defense; Frederic V. Malek, senior adviser to Carlyle Group; Mellon Family Trust of Pittsburgh; Westinghouse Credit Corp., the financial services unit of Westinghouse Electric Corp.; Bankers Trust Co., a unit of Bankers Trust New York Corp.; and a group of Japanese investors represented by the investment banking unit of Tokyo-based Sumitomo Bank.
Bankers Trust and Sumitomo financed the $300 million acquisition from Sears Roebuck.
Coldwell Banker also named three outside director nominees for its 17 member board.
The nominees are Gary Wilson, chief financial officer of Walt Disney Co.; James Montgomery, chief executive officer of Great Western Financial Corp.; and Peter Ubberroth, former commissioner of baseball and now a private investor. 

