.START 

Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. said it expects to report that third-quarter operating profit fell "substantially" from a year earlier, when the maker of insulation, roofing and plastic materials had profit before extraordinary items of $1.36 a share. 

In a prepared statement, the company said the decline "reflects reduced activity in construction, marine and transportation markets." 

An Owens-Corning spokesman said the company still expects to post net income for the just-ended third quarter but he declined to be more specific.
He also declined to comment on expectations for the fourth quarter. 

Owens-Corning closed at $30.75 a share, down $2.875, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading following the news. 

In the 1988 third quarter, Owens-Corning had profit from continuing operations of $57 million.
A charge of $6 million, or 15 cents a share, related to the purchase of company debt made net $51 million, or $1.21 a share.
Sales in the 1988 third quarter totaled $760 million. 

The spokesman said the problems in the construction market relate mainly to "reduced volume in insulation and roofing, especially reroofing and commercial roofing products." He said roof repairs were relatively strong in Texas and should be strong in the Southeast during the fourth quarter as home and building owners repair property damaged by Hurricane Hugo. "But nationally, based on trends so far this year, we expect {that segment} to remain weak over all," he said. 

The spokesman said sales of reinforced-fiberglass material to the boat-building industry also were weak, largely because of softening in the marine market.
Weakness in the auto industry also is expected to continue through the rest of the year.
Car and truck production was strong earlier this year, but expectations of slower sales in the fourth quarter have cut manufacturers' output forecasts.
However, Owens-Corning was able to offset that decline somewhat with new business at General Motors Corp., which recently introduced a new, plastic-body van. 

Owens-Corning expects to post third-quarter results by the end of next week, the spokesman said. 

