.START 

The involvement of units of two major U.S. banks in separate loans to China has signaled a growing willingness among foreign bankers to resume lending to the Beijing government. 

One of the units, BT Asia Ltd., a subsidiary of Bankers Trust New York Corp., this week arranged the syndication of a $50 million, five-year loan to Shortridge Ltd., which is owned by China International Trust & Investment Corp. (Holdings), or Citic.
The loan will be used for Shortridge's share of the purchase of a satellite, a BT Asia director said. 

The other unit, Chase Manhattan Asia Ltd., a Hong Kong subsidiary of Chase Manhattan Corp., of New York, said it is underwriting a $50 million loan for China's biggest trading company, China Resources (Holdings) Co., for general corporate purposes.
Of the total, $30 million can be swapped into marks. 

Amid the international outcry following the shooting of students and bystanders in Beijing on June 4, foreign-bank lending to China came to a halt. 

Bankers in Hong Kong said this week's Citic loan was an important sign that foreign banks are interested in resuming regular business with China. "It's sort of a benchmark," said a U.S. banker who didn't participate in the loan. 

Russell L. Magarity, senior managing director of Chase Manhattan Asia, said "it is time" to start considering loans to China again.
Mr. Magarity said Chase hopes to assemble an international group of banks in the lending syndicate, including some of U.S. and Japanese banks with which China Resources has had a strong relationship in recent years. "Right now we think we can successfully syndicate this loan because of China Resources' name," he said. 

Indeed, the reputations of China Resources and Citic played a significant role in the decisions.
China Resources and Citic are considered exceptionally good credit risks, bankers said.
Other loans to China will have to be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Beyond the political considerations, banks are concerned about the state of China's economy and about borrowers' ability to make loan payments.
Now that the first major syndication of a Chinese loan has proceeded smoothly, a Japanese banker said it will be easier for foreign banks to consider making loans to China. 

Citic, which acts as a sort of merchant bank for overseas acquisitions by China, is a relatively independent company.
Through Shortridge, it is one of three partners in Asia Satellite Telecommunications Co., which plans to launch a private satellite on a Chinese rocket next year.
The other partners are Cable & Wireless PLC of Britain and Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. of Hong Kong.
Citic guaranteed the loan. 

The loan was syndicated to a group of foreign banks from Europe, Hong Kong and Canada, foreign bankers said; they didn't identify the institutions.
BT Asia arranged the syndication but didn't underwrite the loan. 

A BT Asia official wouldn't disclose all the terms of the loan but said it was linked to a currency option that allows banks to receive repayment in yen instead of dollars.
The official said Citic will pay an interest rate that will be about 0.5 percentage point higher than the amount Citic would have paid for a similar borrowing before June 4.
He said it was difficult to calculate the exact interest rate because of the currency option. 

Bankers said they believe China Resources' loan costs have risen by about the same amount. 

