.START 

Government officials here and in other countries laid plans through the weekend to head off a Monday market meltdown -- but went out of their way to keep their moves quiet. 

Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan was on the telephones, making it clear to officials in the U.S. and abroad that the Fed was prepared to inject massive amounts of money into the banking system, as it did in October 1987, if the action were needed to prevent a financial crisis. 

And at the Treasury, Secretary Nicholas Brady talked with friends and associates on Wall Street while Assistant Secretary David Mullins carefully analyzed data on the Friday market plunge. 

But the officials feared that any public announcements would only increase market jitters.
In addition, officials at the Fed and in the Bush administration decided that avoiding overt actions and statements over the weekend would give them more strength and flexibility should Friday's market drop turn into this morning's rout. 

"The disadvantage at this point is that anything you do that looks like you are doing too much tends to reinforce a sense of crisis," said one government official, insisting on anonymity. 

The Fed's efforts at secrecy were partly foiled Sunday morning, when both the New York Times and the Washington Post carried stories quoting a senior Fed official saying the central bank was prepared to pour cash into the banking system Monday morning.
Fed Chairman Greenspan was surprised by both stories, according to knowledgeable sources, and insisted he hadn't authorized any public comment.
Nevertheless, Fed officials acknowledged the stories were reasonably accurate portrayals of the central bank's game plan.
It is prepared to assume the same role it played in October 1987, providing money to the markets if necessary to keep the financial system afloat.
The Fed provides money to the banking system by buying government securities from financial institutions. 

The reticence of federal officials was evident in the appearance Sunday of Budget Director Richard Darman on ABC's "This Week." "Secretary of the Treasury Brady and Chairman Greenspan and the chairman of the SEC and others have been in close contact.
I'm sure they'll do what's right, what's prudent, what's sensible," he said. 

When it was suggested his comment was a "non-answer," Mr. Darman replied: "It is a non-answer.
But, in this context, that's the smart thing to do." 

At the Treasury, Secretary Brady issued a statement minimizing the stock market's drop. "Today's stock market decline doesn't signal any fundamental change in the condition of the economy," he said. "The economy remains well-balanced, and the outlook is for continued moderate growth." 

But administration officials conceded that Friday's drop carried the chance of further declines this week. "One possibility is that this is a surgical setback, reasonably limited in its breadth, and not a major problem," said one senior administration official, who also asked that he not be named. "The other is that we see another major disaster, like two years ago.
I think that's less likely." 

Nevertheless, Fed Chairman Greenspan and Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson were in their offices Sunday evening, monitoring events as they unfolded in markets around the world.
The action was expected to begin with the opening of the New Zealand foreign exchange markets at 5 p.m. EST -- when stocks there plunged -- and to continue as the trading day began later in the evening in Tokyo and through early this morning in Europe.
Both the Treasury and the Fed planned to keep market rooms operating throughout the night to monitor the developments.
In Tokyo, share prices dropped sharply by 1.7% in early Monday morning trading.
After the initial slide, the market appeared to be turning around but by early afternoon was headed lower. 

In the Bush administration, the lead is being taken by Treasury Secretary Brady, Undersecretary Robert Glauber and Assistant Secretary Mullins.
The three men worked together on the so-called Brady Commission, headed by Mr. Brady, which was established after the 1987 crash to examine the market's collapse.
As a result they have extensive knowledge in financial markets, and financial market crises. 

Mr. Brady was at the White House Friday afternoon when the stock market's decline began.
He was quickly on the phone with Mr. Mullins, who in turn was talking with the chairmen of the New York and Chicago exchanges.
Later, Mr. Brady phoned Mr. Greenspan, SEC Chairman Richard Breeden and numerous contacts in New York and overseas.
Aides say he continued to work the phones through the weekend. 

Administration officials say President Bush was briefed throughout Friday afternoon and evening, even after leaving for Camp David.
He had frequent telephone consultations with Mr. Brady and Michael Boskin, chairman of the counsel of economic advisers. 

Government officials tried throughout the weekend to render a business-as-usual appearance in order to avoid any sense of panic.
Treasury Undersecretary David Mulford, for instance, was at a meeting of the Business Council in Hot Springs, Va., when the stock market fell, and remained there through the following day.
And as of last night, Fed Chairman Greenspan hadn't canceled his plans to address the American Bankers Association convention in Washington at 10 a.m. this morning. 

Ironically, Mr. Greenspan was scheduled to address the same convention in Dallas on Oct. 20, 1987.
He flew to Dallas on Oct. 19, when the market plummeted 508 points, but then turned around the next morning and returned to Washington without delivering his speech. 

(See related story: "Abreast of the Market: Special Steps Didn't Cool Fever to Sell" -- WSJ Oct. 16, 1989) 

