.START 

Chief executive officers in the New York region say they share a national pessimism about the economy, yet are bullish on their own prospects, according to a study of business executives. 

One particularly positive note in the study of chief executives in the tri-state area, commissioned by National Westminster Bancorp, is that as many as 88% of the executives intend to expand their businesses or at least maintain employment levels in 1990.
Employment at financial-related companies in the New York area were hit hard after the 1987 stock market crash. 

The survey examined the opinions of 550 randomly selected companies in the New York metropolitan area -- Connecticut, Long Island, New York City, Westchester County and New Jersey -- with annual sales between $5 million and $250 million. 

Executives in the area have grown more pessimistic about the performance of the national economy.
When the study was taken in 1988, 32% of the respondents thought the national economy was worse that year than the year before, while in 1989, that stance was taken by 41% of the executives.
The pessimism was greater among the larger -- and more national -- companies. 

Looking ahead, the majority of area officials expect interest rates to decline and inflation to rise, while 44% of the chief executives feel a recession is likely by the end of 

On the regional level, executives had less good news to report about their own businesses.
Only 49% of the executives reported improved company performance this year, down from the 60% in the 1988 study.
Predictably, the year ahead looks brighter; 63% of the executives anticipate better company performance in 1990, while only 10% envision a decline. 

A good sign for the long-term health of the region is that chief executives were generally "quite satisfied" with the region as a business place, saying its benefits consistently outweigh drawbacks.
Highest marks went to the availability of professional business services, which 51% of the executives consider the top benefit.
The local marketplace and availability of professional employees also were ranked high.
Among major drawbacks to the region, 63% consider the level of state taxes at the top of the list, followed by 54% who had the same opinion on local taxes.
Coming in third, 40% said it was the cost of non-professional employees. 

On questions of employment, 40% of the executives increased their work force since last year, and 44% expect to expand next year.
Only 9% reduced their payrolls in the past year. 

For the second year in a row, New Jersey was rated as the region's most desirable place to do business.
Among all of the executives surveyed who would consider a move, 50% would look at New Jersey, compared with an average 23% who would consider other states in the region.
In one of the highest degrees of loyalty shown in the study, of those New Jersey executives considering a move, 74% would stay within the state.
But one-fourth of the state's executives listed transportation problems as a drawback. 

Chief executives in New York City showed a noticeably high expectation of improved company performance in the next year.
In New York, 75% of the executives predict their companies' performance will improve in 1990, compared with an average of 63% from chief executives from the other locales who feel the same way. 

Westchester executives reflected the most bullish prospects for employment.
More companies in Westchester than any other location have increased the number of their employees in the past year.
In 1990, Westchester chief executives lead the way in plans to increase their number of employees.
In Westchester, 51% of the executives anticipate hiring more, while in Long Island that number was 39% and in Connecticut 42%. 

