.START 

Bad real estate loans continued to gnaw at third-quarter profits of Southwestern banks, with the notable exception of institutions that cleansed their books with federal bailouts. 

"You've got a two-tiered market," said Frank W. Anderson, an analyst with Stephens Inc., Little Rock, Ark.
On top, he said, are such dynamos as NCNB Corp. and First City Bancorp of Texas, which acquired big, ailing Texas banks in government-assisted transactions that allowed them to slough off bad loans.
They are expected to ring up big profits for the third quarter, Mr. Anderson said. 

As for the rest, warns James McDermott, an analyst with Keefe Bruyette & Woods, New York, "asset quality concerns are going to dominate third-quarter reports." 

For example, Cullen/Frost Bankers Inc., San Antonio, Texas, is expecting "an uptick in {non-performing loans} related to real estate" in the third quarter, said Thomas Frost, chairman and chief executive.
As the only major bank holding company in Texas to survive without a bailout or merger, Cullen/Frost managed only "very modest" earnings in the period, he said. "If the government handed me a big bucket of money I'd look good, too," Mr. Frost added. 

NCNB Corp. 's Texas operation, on the other hand, is expected to report an operating profit "in line with {or} perhaps a bit better" than its results in the first two quarters, Timothy Hartman, vice chairman of the Texas unit, said.
The Texas unit had an operating profit of $58.7 million in the first quarter and $55.7 million in the second quarter. 

NCNB, based in Charlotte, N.C., bought the banking assets of failed First Republic Bank Corp. of Dallas last year in a transaction expected to cost the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. about $3 billion. (First Republic isn't related to First Republic Bancorp of San Francisco.) Robert Rieke, an analyst with Raucher Pierce Refsnes Inc., Dallas, estimates Houston-based First City's third-quarter net was higher than second quarter earnings of $28.1 million.
However, he estimated that per-share earnings stayed "relatively flat" at about the second quarter's $1.19 a share because the total number of shares outstanding increased. 

First City was recapitalized last year by a group led by Chicago banker A. Robert Abboud.
The FDIC contributed nearly $1 billion to the new organization. 

More recent Texas bailouts won't have much impact on the third quarter results of the new parent companies, analysts said.
These include the sale of MCorp's failed banks to Banc One Corp., Columbus, Ohio; the sale of National Bancshares Corp. of Texas to Equimark Corp. of Pittsburgh; and the sale of Texas American Bancshares Inc. 's banking assets to Deposit Guaranty Bank of Dallas.
The transactions haven't yet been completed and the Texas units are still unprofitable. 

Said Ronald Steinhart, chairman of Deposit Guaranty: "You won't see the newly cleansed bank in operation until approximately Dec. 1." 

Outside Texas, the biggest real estate nightmare for banks in the region is probably Arizona. "Arizona is going to be a mess," said Keefe Bruyette's Mr. McDermott. 

Several banks with operations in Arizona, including First Interstate Bancorp. and Security Pacific Corp., both of Los Angeles, have already indicated they see asset-quality problems.
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, last month took a $126 million charge against earnings related to real estate loans at Chase Bank of Arizona. 

Several credit rating agencies recently downgraded the senior debt of Valley National Corp., warning that the Phoenix-based bank holding company is vulnerable to the deteriorating real estate market. "Despite the special addition to reserves in the second quarter, Valley remains poorly reserved against its real estate exposure," Moody's Investors Service Inc. said in July. 

One of the few bright spots in the region is Colorado, where a mild economic recovery has helped several banks staunch the flow of red ink.
For instance, United Banks of Colorado Inc., the state's largest multibank holding company, resumed a cash dividend earlier this year after recording eight straight quarters of profitability. 

More good news comes from New Mexico, where banks didn't have as much opportunity to get into difficulty in the first place. "The state never grew fast enough to get banking organizations in real trouble and the banking organizations were never big enough to lend into trouble," said Mr. Rieke of Raucher Pierce Refsnes. 

