.START 

Put down that phone. 

Walk around the room; take two deep breaths.
Resist the urge to call your broker and sell all your stocks. 

That's the advice of most investment professionals after Friday's 190-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. 

No one can say for sure what will happen today.
And investment pros are divided on whether stocks will perform well or badly in the next six months.
But they're nearly unanimous on one point: Don't sell into a panic. 

Investors who sold everything after the crash of 1987 lived to regret it.
Even after Friday's plunge, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 48% above where it landed on Oct. 19 two years ago. 

Panic selling also was unwise during other big declines in the past.
The crash of 1929 was followed by a substantial recovery before the great Depression and awful bear market of the 1930s began.
The "October massacres" of 1978 and 1979 were scary, but didn't lead to severe or sustained downturns. 

Indeed, some pros see Friday's plunge, plus any further damage that might occur early this week, as a chance for bargain hunting. "There has been a lot of emotional selling that presents a nice buying opportunity if you've got the cash," says Stephen B. Timbers, chief investment officer of Chicago-based Kemper Financial Services Inc. 

But most advisers think the immediate course for individual investors should be to stand pat. "When you see a runaway train," says Steve Janachowski, partner in the San Francisco investment advisory firm Brouwer & Janachowski, "you wait for the train to stop." 

Even for people who expect a bear market in coming months -- and a sizable number of money managers and market pundits do -- the advice is: Wait for the market to bounce back, and sell shares gradually during rallies.
The best thing individual investors can do is "just sit tight," says Marshall B. Front, executive vice president and head of investment counseling at Stein Roe & Farnham Inc., a Chicago-based investment counseling firm that manages about $18 billion. 

On the one hand, Mr. Front says, it would be misguided to sell into "a classic panic." On the other hand, it's not necessarily a good time to jump in and buy. "This is all emotion right now, and when emotion starts to run, it can run further than anyone anticipates," he said. "So it's more prudent to wait and see how things stabilize." 

Roger Ibbotson, professor of finance at Yale University and head of the market information firm Ibbotson Associates Inc., says, "My real advice would be to just ride through it.
Generally, it isn't wise to be in and out" of the stock market. 

Mr. Ibbotson thinks that this week is "going to be a roller-coaster week." But he also thinks it is "a good week to consider buying." 

John Snyder, former president of the Los Angeles chapter of the National Association of Investors Corp., an organization of investment clubs and individual investors, says his fellow club members didn't sell in the crash of 1987, and see no reason to sell now. "We're dedicated long-term investors, not traders," he says. "We understand panics and euphoria.
And we hope to take advantage of panics and buy stocks when they plunge." 

One camp of investment pros sees what happened Friday as an opportunity.
Over the next days and weeks, they say, investors should look for stocks to buy. 

Friday's action "was an old-fashioned panic," says Alfred Goldman, director of technical market analysis for A.G. Edwards & Sons in St. Louis. "Stocks were being thrown out of windows at any price." His advice: "You ought to be there with a basket catching them." 

James Craig, portfolio manager for the Denver-based Janus Fund, which has one of the industry's better track records, started his buying during Friday's plunge.
Stocks such as Hershey Foods Corp., Wal-Mart Stores Inc., American International Group Inc. and Federal National Mortgage Association became such bargains that he couldn't resist them, he says. 

And Mr. Craig expects to pick up more shares today. "It will be chaotic at first, but I would not be buying if I thought we were headed for real trouble," he says.
He argues that stocks are reasonably valued now, and that interest rates are lower now than in the fall of 1987. 

Mr. Front of Stein Roe suggests that any buying should "concentrate in stocks that have lagged the market on the up side, or stocks that have been beaten down a lot more than the market in this correction." His firm favors selected computer, drug and pollution-control stocks. 

Other investment pros are more pessimistic.
They say investors should sell stocks -- but not necessarily right away.
Many of them stress that the selling can be orderly, gradual, and done when stock prices are rallying. 

On Thursday, William Fleckenstein, a Seattle money manager, used futures contracts in his personal account to place a bet that the broad market averages would decline.
He thinks the underlying inflation rate is around 5% to 6%, far higher than most people suppose. 

In the pension accounts he manages, Mr. Fleckenstein has raised cash positions and invested in gold and natural gas stocks, partly as an inflation hedge.
He thinks government officials are terrified to let a recession start when government, corporate and personal debt levels are so high.
So he thinks the government will err on the side of rekindled inflation. 

As a result, Mr. Fleckenstein says, "I think the ball game's over," and investors are about to face a bear market. 

David M. Jones, vice president at Aubrey G. Lanston & Co., recommends Treasury securities (of up to five years' maturity).
He says the Oct. 6 employment report, showing slower economic growth and a severe weakening in the manufacturing sector, is a warning sign to investors. 

One strategy for investors who want to stay in but hedge their bets is to buy "put" options, either on the individual stocks they own or on a broad market index.
A put option gives its holder the right (but not the obligation) to sell a stock (or stock index) for a specified price (the strike price) until the option expires. 

Whether this insurance is worthwhile depends on the cost of an option.
The cost, or premium, tends to get fat in times of crisis.
Thus, buying puts after a big market slide can be an expensive way to hedge against risk. 

The prices of puts generally didn't soar Friday.
For example, the premium as a percentage of the stock price for certain puts on Eli Lilly & Co. moved up from 3% at Thursday's close to only 3.3% at Friday's close, even though the shares dropped more than $5.50.
But put-option prices may zoom when trading resumes today. 

It's hard to generalize about a reasonable price for puts.
But investors should keep in mind, before paying too much, that the average annual return for stock holdings, long-term, is 9% to 10% a year; a return of 15% is considered praiseworthy.
Paying, say, 10% for insurance against losses takes a deep bite out of the return. 

James A. White and Tom Herman contributed to this article. 

(See related story: "Gurus' Views Vary, But Crash Not Seen" -- WSJ Oct. 16, 1989) 

