.START 

Korean car exports have slid about 40% so far this year, but auto makers here aren't panicking. 

They are enjoying domestic sales that are more than making up for lost overseas sales.
South Korean consumers are expected to buy almost 500,000 passenger cars this year, up 60% from 1988.
In fact, some auto executives suggest that slackened demand for their cars in the U.S. and Canada is a blessing; otherwise they wouldn't be able to keep up with demand in the more profitable local market. 

"We are very lucky to easily change an export loss to domestic plus," says Hong Tu Pyo, managing director of domestic marketing for Hyundai Motor Co. 

As it is, waiting lists of a month aren't unusual for popular models.
Demand is so strong that all of the domestic makers -- Hyundai, Kia Motors Corp., Daewoo Motor Co. and even upstart SsangYong Motor Co. -- plan to build more factories.
Industry analysts predict that by 1995, South Korea will be building three million cars a year -- about half of that for export. 

It's an optimistic move in a industry already facing world-wide overcapacity.
But South Korean auto makers are confident that the export market will bounce back and that demand in Korea will stay strong.
Currently only one in 38 South Koreans owns a car, up from one in 200 a decade ago. "In the year 2000 it will be one car per family.
At that point domestic sales will slow down," says Kim Yoon Kwon, director of marketing for Daewoo Motor. 

The reason for the tremendous demand is simple: South Koreans suddenly have a lot more money. "We never thought we'd own a car," says Kwang Ok Kyong, who just bought a Daewoo LeMans on a five-year loan.
She and her husband started a small printing business and need the car for work as well as for weekend jaunts. 

Pay raises of 60% over the past three years have given many South Koreans the money to enjoy the things they were supplying the rest of the world.
The success of newcomer SsangYong Motor shows the strength of the auto market and its growing diversity.
A part of the construction-oriented conglomerate SsangYong Group, it took over the dying Dong-A Motor Co. in 1986.
SsangYong began making variations of the Jeep-like "Korando" vehicle. (Dong-A had had a technology agreement with Jeep maker American Motors Corp., now a part of Chrysler Corp.) The most popular style is the stretched "Family," which resembles a Ford Bronco or Chevy Blazer.
The four-wheel-drive vehicles start at $15,000; a Family can cost over $25,000. 

SsangYong, which has only about 3% of the domestic market, will sell about 18,000 of its models this year, twice as many as last year.
It sees sales rising 45% to 26,000 units next year. 

The company plans to expand plant capacity 50% by 1991.
By then it also hopes to begin producing a passenger car based on the Volvo 240 and selling for about $20,000. 

Hyundai and Daewoo seem unconcerned about the SsangYong threat, but Kia, the scrappy No.3 auto maker, is selling four-wheel-drive vehicles through its Asia unit.
It plans to sell 1,700 units in 1989. 

Kia, the only Korean car maker that has seen its overseas sales grow in 1989, aims at Korea's common man.
Its advantage has been the peppy little Pride, sold as the Ford Festiva in the U.S.
At 3.8 million won, or $5,700, the econobox is the lowest-priced car in South Korea.
Along with two larger models, the company claims 18% of the domestic market.
Ford Motor Co. and Japan's Mazda Motor Corp. have equity interests in Kia. 

Kia is the most aggressive of the Korean Big Three in offering financing.
Loans for as long as five years make the cars very accessible, with monthly payments as low as 80,000 won, or $120. 

Daewoo Motor, a 50-50 joint venture with General Motors Corp. and the Daewoo Group conglomerate, is the only auto maker that appears to be hurting.
Shipments of its Lemans to GM's Pontiac division are off about 65% from a year ago, versus a 44% decline for Hyundai and an 18% increase for Kia.
Moreover, Daewoo's domestic sales have grown half as fast as sales of its rivals. 

The big problem for Daewoo, which holds about 21% of the market, is the long series of labor disruptions it suffered this year.
But Daewoo is expanding too.
In fact, a sister company, Daewoo Shipbuilding and Heavy Machinery, plans to build 240,000 minicars by the mid-1990s. 

Hyundai, the Korean market leader with a 58% share, also plans to jump into minicars at the same time.
It has a similar project for 200,000 cars a year.
Kia is reportedly also considering such a plan.
Even giant Samsung Group is rumored in the Korean press to be considering getting into the auto-making business; a company spokesman had no comment. 

