.START 

The roller-coaster stock market is making life tougher for small companies trying to raise money. 

In the wake of Friday's plunge and yesterday's rebound, some companies are already postponing deals, and others wish they could.
As in other jittery times, many small businesses expect a particularly rough time raising funds as investors shun risky deals, seeking safety in bigger companies. 

Even if stock prices fully recover from Friday's sharp decline, the unsettled conditions will frighten many investors. 

"The implication of an unsettled situation is that the thing could drop dramatically," says Henry Linsert Jr., chairman of Martek Corp., a four-year-old biotechnology company that is planning a private placement of stock. "The more variables that indicate risk, the more the investor is going to drive a hard bargain." 

Earlier this month, Staples Inc., a Newton, Mass., office-supplies discounter, said it would accelerate expansion plans nationwide and offer more of its stock to the public.
At the time, its shares were selling above their initial offering price of $19, and bankers believed Staples would sell new stock without a hitch. 

But with the company's shares standing at $15 yesterday, a new offering seems unlikely, company officials say.
Business, however, continues to be "robust," and the stock market hasn't affected the concern's expansion plans, says Todd Krasnow, a senior executive. 

Other companies figure they can't avoid the market. "We have capital requirements," says Mr. Linsert, "so we have to go ahead" with a planned $1.5 billion private placement.
Unless the market goes right back up, he says, "it may take us six to nine months to find the money, instead of three." And the Columbia, Md., company may have to settle for a lower price, he adds. 

Life is particularly nerve-racking for companies that had planned to go public this week.
Hand-holding is becoming an investment-banking job requirement. 

Robertson, Stephens & Co., a San Francisco investment banking concern, has a client that looked forward to making its initial public offering yesterday.
Officers of the company, a health-care concern, "were very discouraged on Friday and felt they shouldn't go public; we felt they should," says Sanford Robertson, partner in the banking concern. 

As the market dropped Friday, Robertson Stephens slashed the value of the offering by 7%.
Yesterday, when similar securities rebounded, it bumped the valuation up again.
As of late yesterday, the IPO was still on. 

For many, the situation is especially discouraging because the market for IPOs was showing signs of strengthening after several years of weakness. "We were just beginning to look at the increase in IPOs, seeing the light at the end of the tunnel," says Frank Kline Jr., partner in Lambda Funds, a Beverly Hills, Calif., venture capital concern. "But the tunnel's just gotten longer." 

Companies planning to go public "are definitely taking a second look," says Allen Hadhazy, senior analyst at the Institute for Econometric Research, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., which publishes the New Issues newsletter on IPOs.
He calculates that the recent market slide translated into a 5% to 7% reduction in IPO proceeds to companies. 

Many companies are hesitating.
Exabyte Corp. had been planning to sell 10% of its stock this week in an IPO that would raise up to $28.5 million.
But now, Peter Behrendt, president, says, "We're making decisions on a day-to-day basis." Debt-free and profitable, the Boulder, Colo., computer-products concern could borrow funds if it decides against an IPO now, he says. 

KnowledgeWare Inc., an Atlanta computer-software concern, says it is still planning to go ahead with its IPO this week or next -- unless conditions change. "It's a wait-and-see situation right now," says Terry McGowan, president. 

Delayed financings also would affect the operations of many companies.
Sierra Tucson Cos., a Tucson, Ariz., operator of addiction-treatment centers, has a planned doubling of capacity riding on an IPO scheduled for next week.
William O'Donnell, president, says he still thinks the IPO will succeed.
If it doesn't, he says, the company would have to change its expansion timetable. 

But the market turmoil could be partially beneficial for some small businesses.
In a sagging market, the Federal Reserve System "might flood the market with funds, and that should bring interest rates down," says Leonard T. Anctil, vice president of the Bank of New England, Boston. 

James G. Zafris, president of Danvers Savings Bank, Danvers, Mass., says the market turmoil "is an absolute non-event for small business." For small companies, he says, interest rates are far more important than what happens on stock exchanges.
Mr. Zafris thinks rates are heading down, helping small companies. 

Peter Drake, biotechnology analyst for Vector Securities International, Chicago, thinks market uncertainty may encourage small companies to form more strategic alliances with big corporations.
Partly because the 1987 market crash made it harder for them to find financing, many high-technology concerns have made such alliances recently.
Some even see a silver lining in the dark clouds.
Alan Wells, president of Bollinger, Wells, Lett & Co., a New York merger specialist, thinks panicky investors may lose their enthusiasm for leveraged buy-out and giant takeover deals.
Instead, they could turn to investing in smaller deals involving smaller companies, he says. 

And William E. Wetzel Jr., a University of New Hampshire management professor and director of Venture Capital Network Inc., says the market's gyrations will underline the investors' lack of control in big stock investments.
This will add to the appeal of small business, he says, where investors often have a degree of influence. 

