.START 

No strikeout, but certainly no home run. 

That's how the stock-picking game is shaping up for the months ahead, according to money managers and a few brokers. 

Yesterday's 88-point recovery from Friday's megadrop in the Dow Jones industrials had many brokerage houses proclaiming that stocks are a good bargain again.
But quite a few money managers aren't buying it.
Weakening corporate earnings, they say, are no prescription for a bull market. 

"The stock market ain't going to do much of anything" for a while, says John Neff of Wellington Management, who runs the $8.3 billion Windsor Fund.
He suspects that Friday's market decline may have a second leg, perhaps a 10% to 15% drop later on. 

Mr. Neff says the stock market has lost some powerful driving forces, namely earnings growth and the "LBO sweepstakes" -- buy-out fever that induced investors to bid up whole groups of stocks, such as media and airlines.
After sitting with 20% of his fund in cash before Friday's sell-off, Mr. Neff says he bought "a narrow list of stocks" yesterday. 

With flat corporate profits on the horizon for 1990, money managers say price-earnings multiples that look cheap today might go on being cheap for a long time. 

"This is not a grossly overvalued market, but it's not cheap either," says George Collins, president of the mutual fund company T. Rowe Price Associates in Baltimore. 

According to Institutional Brokers Estimate System, Wall Street market strategists see only a 2.4% jump in company profits in 1990 -- unlike in 1987, when profits a year out looked good (they did soar 36% in 1988). 

Bulls say the market is an incredible bargain, priced at only about 12 times estimated 1989 earnings for stocks in the Standard & Poor's 500 index.
Before the 1987 crash, the P/E was more than 20. 

The common view, says Abby Cohen, strategist for Drexel Burnham Lambert, is that there will be "mild economic growth, modest profit expansion, and things are going to be hunky-dory.
Our view is that we may see a profit decline." Some think investors should sell into rallies.
The market "is going to wind down," says Gerald W. Perritt, a Chicago money manager. "Things are a little less overpriced" after Friday's jolt in the market.
He expects stocks to decline an additional 5% to 30%, with the Dow perhaps bottoming out between 2000 and 2100 "between now and June." 

After Friday's decline, Mr. Perritt's firm ran statistical tests on 100 high-quality stocks, using old-fashioned value criteria devised by Benjamin Graham, an analyst and author in the 1930s and 1940s who is widely considered to be the father of modern securities analysis.
He found 85 still overvalued and 15 fairly valued. 

Nicholas Parks, a New York money manager, expects the market to decline about 15%. "I've been two-thirds in cash since July, and I continue to think that having a defensive position is appropriate," he says.
Companies that piled on debt in leveraged buy-outs during the past two years "will continue to surface as business problems." 

"Generalizations about value aren't useful," says New York money manager John LeFrere of Delta Capital Management.
For instance, he says, International Business Machines and Unisys might look cheap, but investors might continue to do better with stocks like Walt Disney, Procter & Gamble and Coca-Cola, strong performers in recent years. 

Money manager Robert Ross, head of Duncan Ross Associates Ltd. in Vancouver, British Columbia, says stocks would have to fall 15% to 20% before they are competitive with less risky investment alternatives.
Fredric Russell, a money manager in Tulsa, Okla., says Friday's cave-in "is going to have more of a permanent impact on the psyche of many investors than Wall Street would want to admit." 

There are still bulls out there. "I still think we will have a 3000 Dow, whether it's six months or 12 months from now I don't know," says David Dreman, managing partner of Dreman Value Management in New York. "We're doing a little buying" in some stocks "that have really been smashed down." 

Many brokerage house officials also are optimistic.
Yesterday, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch and Dean Witter all increased the proportion of assets they recommend investors commit to stocks.
Dean Witter now recommends 85%, Goldman 65% and Merrill Lynch 50%. 

Some investors say Friday's sell-off was a good thing, because it deflated a lot of crazy takeover speculation. "It was a healthy cleansing," says Michael Holland, who runs Salomon Brothers Asset Management in New York. 

From here out, these investors see a return to old-fashioned investing, based on a company's ability to show profit growth. 

"The fundamentals are pretty strong," Mr. Dreman says. "I don't see this as a bear market at all.
It's a recognition that there was much too much fluff in the LBO market." 

Friday's big fall was "just a blunder by the stock market," says John Connolly, chief strategist for Dean Witter. "It was an overreaction to an event {the failure of a management and union group to get bank financing for a takeover of UAL} that doesn't mean that much to lots of stocks." Many investors have nagging worries, however.
Newspapers are full of headlines about companies defaulting on their debts and banks writing off real estate loans.
That hurts investors' confidence in the economy and stocks. 

Not even all the brokerage firms see clear sailing ahead. "Disappointing profits are likely to get worse in the next two quarters," says Mary Farrell, a market strategist at PaineWebber.
She thinks the market could drop about 10% in the next few months, then recover and go higher.
Companies with steady earnings growth could do well, she says, while others with high debt or poor earnings could see their shares decline far more than 10%. 

