.START 

The dollar rose yesterday but careened like a roller-coaster in a market that traders described as volatile, confused and at times frightening. 

And while the U.S. currency recovered much of the lost ground from its collapse on Friday, several dealers contend that its potential to climb further could be limited. 

In late New York trading, the dollar stood at 1.8685 West German marks and 141.80 yen, compared with 1.8655 marks and 141.50 yen late Friday.
The British pound declined to $1.5755 from $1.5840 before the weekend. 

In early trading in Tokyo Tuesday, the U.S. currency was changing hands at about 142.15 yen, up from Tokyo's Monday close of 140.74 yen, and at about 1.8665 marks, down a bit from late trading Monday in New York. 

At times on Monday, the dollar followed the Dow Jones Industrial Average like a dog on a leash, but only so far. 

"Trading in dollar/mark looked like the Dow's shadow, to a point," said Jeffrey M. Mondschein, managing director in charge of foreign-exchange operations at Continental Bank in Chicago.
He said the U.S. currency was having difficulty rising above the 1.87-mark level. 

"If you take away the stock-market brouhaha of the last few days, you still have lower {U.S.} interest rates, lower {U.S.} capacity utilization, and concern about quarterly earnings and general economic strength -- or lack thereof," said Mr. Mondschein, "so you wonder what the level of the dollar should be." 

Moreover, forecasters predict that the trade deficit for August, to be released today, will worsen to more than $9 billion from $7.6 billion the previous month. 

The dollar's bumpy journey began late Sunday night in Far Eastern trading where panic selling in a thin market initially pushed it as low as 1.8305 marks and 139.10 yen.
By the end of trading in Tokyo, the dollar was quoted at 1.8470 and 140.73 yen. 

But the real fireworks began in European and early New York activity where traders were whipsawed by an inaccurate report of the stock market's opening and a statement by Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan. 

Initially, Reuters reported that the Dow Jones Industrial Average opened down 4%, instead of the actual 0.7% decline.
The mistake was quickly corrected.
But the news prompted traders to dump dollars and then almost immediately buy them back.
On its rebound, the dollar soared from about 1.8480 marks to 1.8735, or 1.4%, within two-and-a-half minutes. 

A spokesman for Reuters in New York confirmed there was an error and that it was quickly corrected. 

Nonetheless, Peter Stein, a trader at Commerzbank in Frankfurt, said: "It's crazy; it's absolute madness." 

Later, news wires reported that Mr. Greenspan said a speech he delivered last week in Moscow had been misinterpreted.
At the time, many traders took it to be a signal that the Fed wouldn't lower interest rates to weaken the dollar, and that the U.S. was at odds with its major trading partners in seeking to stabilize a high-flying U.S. currency at a lower level. 

The dollar promptly fell nearly two pfennig to 1.8560. "It was up and down, up and down, up and down," said Marcus Croonen, a trader at DG Bank in Frankfurt. "It was a bad day." 

Indeed, the dollar dropped 4.4% against the mark from its highs on Friday to its Sunday night lows only to shoot back up 2.4% to its high point yesterday. 

During the hectic activity, traders said the Danish and Italian central banks intervened to defend their respective currencies against the strengthening mark. 

Roberto Bianchi, a vice president at Union Bank of Switzerland, described the market's mood as confused. "Everybody keeps repeating that it's OK, it's not the same as 1987, the central banks stand ready to stabilize the market, and yet there is a lot of uncertainty." 

Mr. Bianchi said some big European institutional investors were selling dollars in lots of $100 million to $200 million. "Investors who had been in dollars for a long time got out.
That led to nervousness in the trading room," said Mr. Bianchi. 

Yet Heiko Thieme, an investment strategist for Deutsche Bank in New York, contended that Europeans hadn't purchased many American shares this year.
Even so, he's bullish. 

"In my view, the dollar isn't vulnerable at all.
On a fundamental basis, I'm not afraid about the dollar, which runs more of a risk of being too strong than too weak," said Mr. Thieme.
He expects the U.S. trade deficit to keep improving and the U.S. economy to expand at 2% to 2.5% next year. 

"The recession fears are overdone and inflation hysteria totally unfounded," Mr. Thieme argued.
He also said that at about 3% of the total output of goods and services, the U.S. budget deficit is manageable. 

Thus, with little risk of losing profits through a deteriorating currency, "what you have here is a unique buying opportunity," said Mr. Thieme of the U.S. stock market. 

George Kuster, a manager at Gulf & Occidental Investment S.A. in Geneva, agrees but only to a point.
Unlike October 1987, "this time I was laughing.
I'm convinced that this {stock market} is going to go up," he said. 

Nonetheless, Mr. Kuster added: "I don't trust the U.S. market that much" because of the dollar's volatility. "My clients lost a lot of money in the 1970s because of the dollar, so I can afford not to gain" from U.S. equities.
Instead, the Swiss money manager sees better opportunities in the Japanese, West German and French markets. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery rose $4 to $367.30 an ounce in moderate trading.
Estimated volume was 4.5 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Tuesday, gold was quoted at about $366.27 an ounce, down $2 an ounce from Monday. 

