.START 

Consumers may want to move their telephones a little closer to the TV set. 

Couch-potato jocks watching ABC's "Monday Night Football" can now vote during halftime for the greatest play in 20 years from among four or five filmed replays.
Two weeks ago, viewers of several NBC daytime consumer segments started calling a 900 number for advice on various life-style issues.
And the new syndicated "reality" show "Hard Copy" records viewers' opinions for possible airing on the next day's show. 

Interactive telephone technology has taken a new leap in sophistication, and television programmers are racing to exploit the possibilities.
Eventually viewers may grow bored with the technology and resent the cost.
But right now programmers are figuring that viewers who are busy dialing up a range of services may put down their remote control zappers and stay tuned. 

"We've been spending a lot of time in Los Angeles talking to TV production people," says Mike Parks, president of Call Interactive, which supplied technology for both ABC Sports and NBC's consumer minutes. "With the competitiveness of the television market these days, everyone is looking for a way to get viewers more excited." 

One of the leaders behind the expanded use of 900 numbers is Call Interactive, a joint venture of giants American Express Co. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. Formed in August, the venture weds AT&T's newly expanded 900 service with 200 voice-activated computers in American Express's Omaha, Neb., service center. 

Other long-distance carriers have also begun marketing enhanced 900 service, and special consultants are springing up to exploit the new tool.
Blair Entertainment, a New York firm that advises TV stations and sells ads for them, has just formed a subsidiary -- 900 Blair -- to apply the technology to television. 

The use of 900 toll numbers has been expanding rapidly in recent years.
For a while, high-cost pornography lines and services that tempt children to dial (and redial) movie or music information earned the service a somewhat sleazy image, but new legal restrictions are aimed at trimming excesses. 

The cost of a 900 call is set by the originator -- ABC Sports, for example -- with the cheapest starting at 75 cents.
Billing is included in a caller's regular phone bill.
From the fee, the local phone company and the long-distance carrier extract their costs to carry the call, passing the rest of the money to the originator, which must cover advertising and other costs. 

In recent months, the technology has become more flexible and able to handle much more volume.
Before, callers of 900 numbers would just listen and not talk, or they'd vote "yes" or "no" by calling one of two numbers. (People in the phone business call this technology "900 click.") Now, callers are led through complex menus of choices to retrieve information they want, and the hardware can process 10,000 calls in 90 seconds. 

Up to now, 900 numbers have mainly been used on local TV stations and cable channels.
MTV used one to give away the house that rock star Jon Bon Jovi grew up in.
For several years, Turner Broadcasting System's Cable News Network has invited viewers to respond nightly to topical issues ("Should the U.S. military intervene in Panama?"), but even the hottest controversies on CNN log only about 10,000 calls. 

The newest uses of the 900-interactive technology demonstrate the growing variety of applications.
Capital Cities/ABC Inc., CBS Inc. and General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. unit are expected to announce soon a joint campaign to raise awareness about hunger.
The subject will be written into the plots of prime-time shows, and viewers will be given a 900 number to call.
Callers will be sent educational booklets, and the call's modest cost will be an immediate method of raising money. 

Other network applications have very different goals.
ABC Sports was looking for ways to lift deflated halftime ratings for "Monday Night Football." Kurt Sanger, ABC Sports's marketing director, says that now "tens of thousands" of fans call its 900 number each week to vote for the best punt return, quarterback sack, etc. 

Profit from the calls goes to charity, but ABC Sports also uses the calls as a sales tool: After thanking callers for voting, Frank Gifford offers a football videotape for $19.95, and 5% of callers stay on the line to order it.
Jackets may be sold next. 

Meanwhile, NBC Sports recently began "Scores Plus," a year-round, 24-hour 900 line providing a complex array of scores, analysis and fan news.
A spokesman said its purpose is "to bolster the impression that NBC Sports is always there for people." 

NBC's "On-Line" consumer minutes have increased advertiser spending during the day, the network's weakest period.
Each weekday matches a sponsor and a topic: On Mondays, Unilever N.V.'s Lever Bros. sponsors tips on diet and exercise, followed by a 30-second Lever Bros. commercial. 

Viewers can call a 900 number for additional advice, which will be tailored to their needs based on the numbers they punch ("Press one if you're pregnant," etc.).
If the caller stays on the line and leaves a name and address for the sponsor, coupons and a newsletter will be mailed, and the sponsor will be able to gather a list of desirable potential customers. 

Diane Seaman, an NBC-TV vice president, says NBC has been able to charge premium rates for this ad time.
She wouldn't say what the premium is, but it's believed to be about 40% above regular daytime rates. "We were able to get advertisers to use their promotion budget for this, because they get a chance to do couponing," says Ms. Seaman. "And we were able to attract some new advertisers because this is something new." 

Mr. Parks of Call Interactive says TV executives are considering the use of 900 numbers for "talk shows, game shows, news and opinion surveys." Experts are predicting a big influx of new shows in 1990, when a service called "automatic number information" will become widely available.
This service identifies each caller's phone number, and it can be used to generate instant mailing lists. 

"Hard Copy," the new syndicated tabloid show from Paramount Pictures, will use its 900 number for additional purposes that include research, says executive producer Mark B. von S. Monsky. "For a piece on local heroes of World War II, we can ask people to leave the name and number of anyone they know who won a medal," he says. "That'll save us time and get people involved." 

But Mr. Monsky sees much bigger changes ahead. "These are just baby steps toward real interactive video, which I believe will be the biggest thing yet to affect television," he says.
Although it would be costly to shoot multiple versions, TV programmers could let audiences vote on different endings for a movie.
Fox Broadcasting experimented with this concept last year when viewers of "Married . . . With Children" voted on whether Al should say "I love you" to Peg on Valentine's Day. 

Someday, viewers may also choose different depths of news coverage. "A menu by phone could let you decide, `I'm interested in just the beginning of story No. 1, and I want story No. 2 in depth," Mr. Monsky says. "You'll start to see shows where viewers program the program." 

