.START 

In all the finger-pointing in the wake of Friday's stock-market plunge, you'd think the Transportation Department, of all agencies, would be safe. 

Look again.
Some people on Wall Street -- and even some in the Bush administration -- think that Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner may have played a second-hand role in the stock slide. 

His drumbeat of warnings on the perils of airline leveraged buy-outs, this theory goes, spooked major banks out of bankrolling the buy-out of UAL Inc.
And that, in turn, sent the market into Friday's tailspin. 

Mr. Skinner's LBO comments "probably helped discourage some of the banks from participating" in the UAL deal, says Louis Marckesano, airline analyst for Janney Montgomery Scott Inc., a Philadelphia brokerage house. "The government is putting its nose where it doesn't belong, and Skinner is at the head of the pack." 

Many others -- indeed, most industry officials and members of Congress -- absolve Mr. Skinner, saying that the UAL deal was flawed from the start.
But whether he single-handedly sparked the crash or had nothing to do with it, one thing is clear in the aftermath of the price slide: Sam Skinner, by his repeated jawboning on the buy-out issue, has irritated some in the Bush administration, so much so that some White House officials want to rein him in. 

Yesterday, for example, the administration came out in opposition to legislation to strengthen the Transportation Department's hand in blocking leveraged buy-outs -- despite statements by Mr. Skinner to Congress that suggested he looked favorably on it, without explicitly endorsing it.
Moreover, administration officials say that Office of Management and Budget Director Richard Darman, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Council of Economic Advisers Michael Boskin and U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills all have had problems with Mr. Skinner's jawboning. 

Secretary Skinner, for his part, says "it's silly" to blame him for the market crash. "The banks in this country and in Japan couldn't put the financing together on the terms offered," he said in a telephone interview from Detroit, where he was speaking to the Economic Club of Detroit. "They have the same kind of questions that I raised about the financial aspects of the transaction." 

At the very least, the administration has been sending mixed signals about leveraged buy-outs and foreign ownership of U.S. airlines.
Last month, Mr. Skinner forced Northwest Airlines to reduce a stake held by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines to ensure, he said, that the foreign airline wouldn't illegally control Northwest. 

But it isn't clear how he would treat other leveraged buy-outs.
Each deal, he insists, must be handled separately, on a "case-by-case" basis.
That gives Mr. Skinner lots of wiggle room, but critics say it doesn't provide a clear picture to the business community of what would pass government muster. 

"It's a regulatory scandal," says Timothy Pettee, a Merrill Lynch & Co. airline analyst, who contends that the lack of clear standards raises the specter of inconsistent decision-making and unfair treatment. 

Mr. Skinner says he hasn't spelled out a policy for leveraged buy-outs because Wall Street bankers and lawyers would simply find ways to circumvent it.
But others say Mr. Skinner is gagged until the Economic Policy Council, a cabinet-level group that makes decisions on national economic issues, finishes its ruminations on the issue.
The group is scheduled to discuss airline buy-outs again today. 

But although the administration has yet to reach a decision on airline buy-outs, President Bush and Treasury Secretary Brady in general don't have philosophical problems with leveraged buy-outs or foreign investment involving non-airline companies, and don't appear inclined to block them.
Mr. Bush hasn't yet focused on the airline buy-out question. 

The buy-out issue is politically and financially complex because of two separate but intertwining questions -- foreign ownership and debt levels.
Foreign companies are barred by law from holding more than 25% voting stock, or exerting actual control, over U.S. airlines.
Under the original Northwest Airlines bid, KLM would have contributed 57% of the equity but received only 5% of the voting stock. 

The Transportation Department concluded that was a violation of the spirit, if not the letter, of the law, and persuaded Northwest to restructure the deal.
Among other things, the Economic Policy Council is discussing the department's interpretation of the law. 

It appears that some leading administration officials believe the Northwest decision leaves the U.S. open to charges of protectionism and could undermine the U.S. position in international trade talks.
Mr. Skinner, they complain, went too far in defining "control" by American citizens and should be discouraged from applying the same reasoning to future buy-outs. 

Mr. Skinner plays down any rift in the administration on the foreign-ownership question. "I think that Darman, Brady, Boskin and I all have the same basic understanding of the importance of foreign investment in this country," he said yesterday. "And they all understand I have a statutory duty to enforce safety and existing law regarding foreign ownership." 

He and other department officials argue that it would be foolish to open U.S. markets to foreign carriers through investments, when other countries are blocking expanded service by American carriers overseas. 

The debt issue also is contentious.
Mr. Skinner says he is concerned that heavily leveraged airlines may be so stretched for funds that safety will suffer. "I have to make sure that every company spends the right amount on maintenance," he says. 

But some experts say that there isn't a correlation between an airline's debt load and its safety record. "No systematic link between finances and safety has ever been demonstrated," says Michael Levine, dean of the Yale University School of Organization and Management and formerly a top official with the Civil Aeronautics Board. 

Mr. Skinner satisfied his safety concerns on the Northwest deal by requiring the airline to file certain financial information that could affect safety, including maintenance expenditures.
But now he is under pressure by some in Congress to extend those reporting requirements to other debt-laden airlines that haven't been involved in recent buy-outs. 

A final dispute involved in the leveraged buy-out issue is how much authority the Transportation Department should have in dealing with LBOs.
Several members of Congress, generally delighted with Mr. Skinner's activist approach to buy-outs, want the department to be able to block the deals before they become final.
But the administration told lawmakers yesterday that it opposed the legislation, saying the government already has enough authority. 

Currently, however, the Transportation Department's authority over leveraged buy-outs appears to some to be a case of too much, too late.
The department doesn't have prior-review authority.
In addition, if it can't persuade a company to restructure an unacceptable buy-out plan, its only recourse is to revoke the airline's certificate -- in effect grounding the carrier.
That, says House Aviation Subcommittee Chairman James Oberstar, a Minnesota Democrat, is like "using a howitzer to go deer hunting." 

