.START 

International Business Machines Corp. said earnings tumbled 30% in the third quarter, even a bit further than expected, rendering the outlook doubtful for the next few quarters. 

The main reason was a delay in shipment of new high-end disk drives, a business that accounts for some 10% of IBM's $60 billion of annual revenue. 

IBM, which telegraphed the poor results three weeks ago, also cited an increase in its leasing business, which tends to lock in business long-term but cut revenue in the near term.
In addition, IBM noted that the stronger dollar has cut the value of overseas revenue and earnings when they are translated into dollars. 

Earnings fell to $877 million, or $1.51 a share, somewhat below securities analysts' revised expectations of around $1.60 a share.
That compared with the year-earlier $1.25 billion, or $2.10 a share -- which was inflated by a 15-cents-a-share gain from the sale of some MCI Communications Corp. stock and by an unspecified amount from a payment by Fujitsu Ltd. relating to a software dispute.
Revenue climbed 4.3% to $14.31 billion from $13.71 billion. 

IBM, Armonk, N.Y., remained upbeat.
The computer giant, whose U.S. results have been dismal for years, noted that revenue rose again in the U.S. in the third quarter, following an increase in the second period.
The company said in a statement that "demand for IBM products and services continues to be good world-wide.
We do not see anything in the fundamentals of our business that would cause us to change our strategy of investing for profitable growth." 

Securities analysts, however, remained downbeat. "I think 1990 will be another mediocre year," said Steve Milunovich of First Boston. 

Jay Stevens of Dean Witter actually cut his per-share earnings estimate to $9 from $9.50 for 1989 and to $9.50 from $10.35 in 1990 because he decided sales would be even weaker than he had expected.
Both estimates would mark declines from the 1988 net of $5.81 billion, or $9.80 a share, which itself was well below the record IBM set in 1984. 

Mr. Stevens said he kept a "buy/hold" recommendation on the stock only because "all the damage has been done." He said the stock hasn't traded below 1 1/2 times book value over the past 10 years, which at the moment computes to a stock price of $100.
The stock closed yesterday at $103 a share, up just $1 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange as the market surged. 

Analysts worry that the disk-drive and leasing problems will last at least through the first quarter. 

"A key part of the question is, how soon does this disk-drive come and how soon does production ramp up?" said Steve Cohen at SoundView Financial Group. "And the input I've had from customers is that it still could be a while." 

On leasing, Bob Djurdjevic at Annex Research said he thinks IBM has hurt itself unnecessarily.
He said IBM has priced its leases aggressively, thinking that would help win business.
But he said IBM would have won the business anyway as a sale to a third party that would have then leased the equipment to the customer.
He said IBM has not only hurt its short-term revenue outlook but has also been losing money on its leases. 

Bob Bardagy, executive vice president of marketing at Comdisco Inc., a huge leasing firm, said: "To put it mildly, IBM Credit has been doing some of the worst economic deals of any leasing company we have ever seen." 

IBM is expected to get a boost soon when it announces some new versions of its mainframes.
But the basic technology in the line is almost five years old, which means it is long in the tooth, and competitors are rolling out strong products of their own. 

IBM is gaining momentum in the personal-computer market, and is expected to introduce some impressive workstations early next year.
But it's hard to squeeze much profit out of the personal-computer business these days, and the workstation market, while important, is too small to rely on for much growth. 

The disk drives will doubtless sell well when they finally become available.
But the AS/400, IBM's highly successful minicomputer line, is losing its momentum, and some analysts said sales could even decline in the fourth quarter.
In addition, IBM's growth in software in the third quarter was just 8.8%, well below historical levels even when adjusted to reflect last year's payment from Fujitsu and the stronger dollar.
And expenses, up 7.9% in the quarter, have stayed stubbornly high. 

In the nine months, IBM earned $3.17 billion, or $5.43 a share, down 8.4% from the year-earlier $3.46 billion, or $5.83 a share.
Revenue increased 6.5% to $42.25 billion from $39.68 billion. 

