.START 

The turmoil on Wall Street may benefit some retailers attempting to lead leveraged buy-outs of their specialty and department-store chains, investment bankers and retailers said. 

Managers at five chains have said in recent weeks that they intend to bid for their companies.
The chains include Bloomingdale's, owned by Campeau Corp., Toronto; Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field's, owned by B.A.T Industries PLC, London; and B. Altman & Co. and Sakowitz Inc., owned by Hooker Corp., which is now being managed by a court-appointed provisional liquidator.
Hooker is based in Sydney, Australia. 

The combination of so many chains available for sale, the recent failures of such retailing LBO's as Miller & Rhoads Inc. and declining investor confidence will drive down prices, retailing observers said. 

"The pricing will become more realistic, which should help management," said Bruce Rosenthal, a New York investment banker with Nathan S. Jonas & Co. "Investors aren't going to be throwing money at any of the proposed LBOs, but doing deals on the basis of ridiculous assumptions never made sense, either." 

Earlier this year, bankers and other investors were willing to provide financing because they assumed there would be major gains in both profitability and sales, Mr. Rosenthal added.
Those days are over now, he believes. 

"Competition from third parties who have cash and are prepared to buy has always existed and will continue," added Mr. Rosenthal. "But when prices were crazy, it was even harder to do an LBO. Bankers believed in the greater-fool theory that says somebody else is always willing to pay more.
This is no longer true today." 

At Saks Fifth Avenue, Paul Leblang, senior vice president, marketing, agreed that lower prices will help his management team in their proposed LBO. 

"Having to take on less debt would certainly be an advantage," said Mr. Leblang. "It would also help us in our search for equity partners.
To make an LBO work, now we are going to need more than just junk bonds." None believe the proposed management LBOs will be easy to complete, especially at B. Altman & Co., which is under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
Not only could the Wall Street gyrations damp Christmas sales if consumers lose confidence in the economy, but potential junk-bond buyers are sure to demand even stronger covenants and greater management equity participation. 

Further, many institutions today holding troubled retailers' debt securities will be reticent to consider additional retailing investments. "It's called bad money driving out good money," said one retailing observer. "Institutions that usually buy retail paper have to be more concerned." 

However, the lower prices these retail chains are now expected to bring should make it easier for managers to raise the necessary capital and pay back the resulting debt.
In addition, the fall selling season has generally been a good one, especially for those retailers dependent on apparel sales for the majority of their revenues. 

"What's encouraging about this is that retail chains will be sold on the basis of their sales and earnings, not liquidation values," said Joseph E. Brooks, chairman and chief executive officer of Ann Taylor Inc., a specialty chain. "Retailers who had good track records of producing profits will have a better chance to buy back their companies." 

Still, most retailing observers expect that all the proposed retailing LBOs will depend partly on the sale of junk bonds, a market already in tumult, in part because of concerns associated with bonds issued by the Federated and Allied units of Campeau. 

"Prices for retail chains are lower today than they were last week, which will help management," said Gilbert Harrison, chairman of Financo Inc., an investment-banking firm specializing in retailing acquisitions. "But the hurdle of financing still has to be resolved.
Potential bondholders will either look for greater equity participation on behalf of management, or insist the equity component of the deals be substantially greater than in the past." 

