.START 

Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev wants to bring the nation's reformist press back into line, blaming it for contributing to the many problems he faces and even suggesting that one liberal editor resign. 

Mr. Gorbachev's comments, made at a meeting with Soviet national editors and media executives Friday, indicate his growing frustration with the nation's mounting problems.
According to people who attended, he didn't advocate an end to glasnost, his policy of openness.
But he made clear that the press should show greater responsibility in its reporting and cut back on criticism of his reforms. 

The text of his remarks hasn't been published, and editors say they have no instructions as to whether it will be.
Accounts of previous such meetings with media and other groups have been printed, sometimes after a delay of several days. 

Although glasnost has given the government-controlled media here much greater freedom to report and criticize, Mr. Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders still regard newspapers and TV as important propaganda tools they can use at will. 

According to participants at the meeting and Soviet journalists who were later briefed by their editors, Mr. Gorbachev blamed the press for fueling a nationwide mood of despondency.
In particular, he complained about some articles this summer that openly discussed the possibility of a coup or civil war in the Soviet Union, and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by printing stories about impending shortages. 

He singled out the daily Izvestia and the weekly Argumenty i Fakty, and also gave stinging criticism of Yuri Afanasyev, a leading reformist historian who has written articles attacking the Communist Party.
Among other things, Mr. Gorbachev questioned whether Mr. Afanasyev should remain in the party. 

The meeting lasted a little under two hours and was attended by most members of the ruling Politburo.
There was no other speaker apart from the Soviet leader, and those attacked weren't given the opportunity to defend themselves.
Mr. Afanasyev, who isn't an editor, didn't attend. 

According to participants, Mr. Gorbachev was particularly incensed by an article on the front page of Argumenty i Fakty this month that examined the popularity of members of the Soviet Parliament.
The piece was based on a survey of 1,500 readers' letters and contained some criticism of Mr. Gorbachev himself. 

The newspaper wrote that readers assessed his role both positively and negatively.
It said many thanked the Soviet leader for his "self-control, modesty, culture and ability to hear a speaker out." But others criticized him, "for imposing his opinion on other deputies, giving commentaries to many speeches, holding elections with no choice of candidate, putting pressure on the voting process and maneuvering between the right and left wings" of the Parliament.
All this, the paper quoted readers as saying, "has seriously weakened his authority." 

The Soviet leader apparently suggested to Argumenty i Fakty's editor, Vyacheslav Starkov, that he should resign.
The comment, which Mr. Starkov relayed to his staff, has sparked anger and bitterness at the paper.
Mr. Starkov has been summoned to see the Kremlin's ideology chief, Vadim Medvedev, in the near future, and may discover then if he is to be fired. 

Izvestia was criticized for a front-page article last Wednesday that took a sharp look at the Parliament's activities.
It attacked the level of a debate on the private-sector cooperative movement, saying "the discussion was more like a riot than a civilized exchange of points of view." And it questioned the speed with which the Parliament was adopting new legislation, often with a minimum of debate. 

Speaking to foreign reporters, Ivan Laptev, Izvestia's editor, sought to play down Mr. Gorbachev's criticism, but he acknowledged that his paper had been singled out.
The Parliament yesterday approved legislation that imposes new restrictions on the cooperative movement, enabling local authorities to set ceilings for prices and preventing the "speculative" sale of goods in short supply for prices higher than that charged by the state. 

