.START 

In response to your extracts from David Fenton's memo ("How a PR Firm Executed the Alar Scare," editorial page, Oct. 3): For the past 10 years, the Environmental Protection Agency has known about the carcinogenic hazards of Alar, and has carried on proceedings to remove the chemical from the market.
Yet until recently, no significant progress had occurred because the pesticide manufacturers and other special interests have blocked necessary congressional reform, stymied EPA actions to cancel Alar and other hazardous pesticides, and kept the public in the dark about the threat of pesticides. 

In this country, major reforms occur only when substantial public pressure is applied to the government and Congress in order to counteract the lockhold of special interests.
Therefore, the Natural Resources Defense Council specifically chose to inform the public about the risks posed by pesticides in foods.
To move the pesticide-reform agenda, NRDC -- like any major corporation or the government -- used the professional communication skills of a public-relations firm to educate the public about the results of our two-year-long scientific study on pesticides residues in children's food. 

NRDC offers no apologies for making public the results of our report on pesticides in the diet of preschoolers.
We will continue to present the facts about pesticides in food to the broadest possible segment of society. 

Americans have a right to know what is in their food and to do something about it if they choose.
Until the food supply is safe, especially for children, NRDC will keep doing everything we can to educate the public about the unnecessary and intolerable risk of pesticides. 

John H. Adams 

Executive Director 

National Resources Defense Council 

New York 

Mr. Fenton's PR firm has abused the trust of the media and done the public no favor.
Just as you can yell "wolf" only so many times before people cease to heed you, a PR firm can manipulate the press only once, and then it loses all credibility.
Such firms go quickly bankrupt. 

C. Brian Maddox 

New York 

I was fascinated to read political publicist David Fenton's self-serving celebration of his own work in creating the illusion that Alar was "an intolerable risk" to Americans -- particularly American children -- when used on apples. (The one "fact" that caught my eye -- the alleged $700,000 paid by the apple growers to Hill & Knowlton -- was overstated by more than a factor of two.) 

While I doubt the media were as gullible and malleable as Mr. Fenton's memo suggests, the Alar scare was created, mostly out of thin air, just as Mr. Fenton claims, and the media that were taken in can learn something from this episode.
So, for that matter, can other industries subject to this kind of guerrilla PR attack. 

Robert L. Dilenschneider 

President and CEO 

Hill & Knowlton Inc. 

New York 

Mr. Fenton says it was not the intent of the NRDC to have school systems ban apples.
Am I also to believe that Meryl Streep did not intend to harm apple growers by condemning the use of Alar?
Well, apple growers were hurt and many others were needlessly frightened by this news story. 

Scientific fact was replaced with media hype produced by genuinely concerned but irrational people who created a dangerous phenomenon when, by using bad information and bad logic, they skillfully frightened people about agricultural chemicals. 

My family and I will continue to believe the FDA, USDA, EPA and the surgeon general and follow their nutritional guidelines to eat a balanced diet that includes many fresh fruits and vegetables. 

Frederick Walsifer Jr. 

Colts Neck, N.J. 

