.START 

Wall Street's takeover-stock speculators yesterday suffered their worst bloodbath since the Black Monday crash of October 1987. 

Even as the stock market rebounded from Friday's 190.58-point rout, takeover traders were hammered by setbacks in two big airline takeover deals.
Some analysts estimated that paper losses could total $500 million for the takeover traders, known as risk arbitragers, or "arbs." 

Nearly all of the big paper losses were caused by declines of more than 20% in two airline stocks, UAL Corp. and AMR Corp. Wall Street's arbitrage desks had loaded up on stocks of both companies after each had received takeover proposals from investors.
The bid for UAL came from Marvis Davis of Beverly Hills, Calif., and the bid for AMR came from Donald Trump of New York. 

But in the wake of Friday's announcement that a UAL management-union group couldn't obtain bank financing for its agreement to buy UAL at $300 a share, UAL stock plunged $56.875 yesterday to close at $222.875 a share in New York Stock Exchange composite trading of nearly 2.3 million shares.
On Friday, the stock didn't trade after the buy-out group announced its financing troubles. 

That was bad enough for the arbs. "On balance, the Street's biggest position has been UAL, mostly {bought} in the $280 range," said Frank Gallagher, director of Phoenix Capital Markets, who follows arbitrage activity. 

But the arbs were quickly hit with another dose of bad news when Mr. Trump announced that he was withdrawing his proposal to buy AMR at $120 a share.
After trading in AMR resumed, the stock fell sharply to close at $76.50 a share, down $22.125 on the day in Big Board composite trading of more than 4.7 million shares. 

Mr. Gallagher estimates that arbitragers owned the equivalent of nearly 30% of UAL's stock, or about six million shares, indicating losses of about $350 million.
He estimates that arbs own the equivalent of about 10% of AMR's stock, also about six million shares, indicating an additional $130 million in losses. 

Several other stocks owned by takeover traders continued to fall.
Many takeover stocks rebounded somewhat yeterday, but none made up all of their sharp declines on Friday. 

Despite the losses, there haven't been any reports of arbitrage or brokerage firms that have encountered serious financial difficulties.
For most takeover-stock traders, huge profits from booming takeover activity last year would provide a cushion against current losses. 

Arbitragers at several major Wall Street securities firms said that UAL was by far the biggest stock position that they owned.
They also believe that UAL was the biggest position for most other arbs. 

"In the arbitrage community, UAL was viewed as being a very safe deal," said one trader.
Arbs believed that major banks would easily finance the UAL buy-out group's $6.79 billion bid, and were stunned on Friday when the group couldn't obtain the necessary loans. 

Several traders said they weren't selling UAL shares because they believe the buy-out group will be able to obtain financing to complete the acquisition eventually, although perhaps at a price of less than $300 a share. 

Mr. Gallagher thinks that much of the heavy trading in UAL shares was "one arb passing it on to another.
I don't think you have institutional investors buying the stock." 

Gainers among the arb's favorite stocks included Hilton Hotels Corp., which rose $9.50 a share to close at $94.50 in Big Board composite trading, and Warner Communications Inc., which rose $1.875 to close at $63.375.
Hilton is soliciting bids for some or all of its hotel and casino operations; Warner is being acquired by Time Warner Inc., which already owns about 58% of Warner. 

The past two trading days, while painful, haven't been as disastrous for the arbs as the October 1987 market crash because takeover-related stocks haven't dropped as sharply as they did two years ago, and traders aren't as deeply in debt as they were then. 

On Friday and yesterday, the worst price declines among takeover-related stocks were about 20%, with most takeover stocks falling between 5% and 15%.
In October 1987, however, stocks of some potential takeover targets, such as Dayton Hudson Corp., fell about 50%, Mr. Gallagher said. 

A trader at one major Wall Street firm said his arbitrage desk had about 30% of its capital currently invested in cash.
Two years ago, he said, his firm had borrowed an amount equal to about 30% of its capital so that it could buy more stocks.
Mr. Gallagher said he believes that situation is typical of the more conservative strategies that many arbitragers adopted after the crash. 

When traders borrow money to buy additional amounts of stock, they run the risk of having to sell stocks after a sharp price decline such as yesterday's to meet margin calls.
Margin calls are demands by lenders that traders put up more cash to make up for declines in the value of stocks that serve as collateral for loans. 

One trader, however, said he believes that most of the selling in takeover-related stocks in the past two trading days has been the result of judgments by traders that takeover bids are less likely to be completed, rather than selling prompted by margin calls. 

Stocks in which `risk arbitrage' speculators have large positions 

