.START 

A federal appeals court struck down a natural-gas regulation that had prevented pipeline companies from passing to customers part of $1 billion in costs from controversial "take-or-pay" contracts. 

The court, in a 3-0 ruling, threw out a deadline set by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for settling old contract disputes over gas that the pipeline companies reserved but didn't use. 

FERC's regulation had given pipelines until March 31, 1989, to pass on to customers as much as 50% of the costs of buying out their broken contracts, which were made with producers when gas prices were high and supplies short. 

A majority of old contracts were renegotiated by the deadline and settled at steep discounts.
But pipeline companies estimate they still face $2.4 billion in liabilities from unresolved disputes, including $1 billion they fear they won't be able to pass on to customers. 

According to industry lawyers, the ruling gives pipeline companies an important second chance to resolve remaining disputes and take advantage of the cost-sharing mechanism.
The court left open whether FERC could reimpose a new deadline later. 

The court, agreeing with pipeline companies, found the March 31 deadline was "arbitrary and capricious" and "highly prejudicial to the bargaining power of pipelines" that were forced to negotiate settlement of the old take-or-pay contracts to meet the deadline. 

A report last month by the Interstate Natural Gas Association of America found that pipelines' settlement costs had jumped in the three months before the deadline to 39 cents on the dollar, from 22 cents on the dollar in 1988. 

The court ordered FERC to justify within 60 days not only its cost-sharing deadline, but other major elements of its proposed regulation for introducing more competition into natural-gas transportation.
The court also questioned a crediting mechanism that could be used to resolve take-or-pay liabilities. 

The complex regulation, known in the industry as Order 500, has been hotly contested by all sides, including natural-gas producers, pipelines, local distribution companies and consumers.
The court's decision would allow FERC to change some of its provisions, but ensures it will be reviewed again quickly by the court. 

