.START 

Should you really own stocks? 

That's a question a lot of people are asking, following the stock market's stunning display of volatility.
Whipsawed financially and emotionally by Friday's heartstopping 190-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average and yesterday's 88-point rebound, they're wondering if an individual has any business being in the market. 

The answer, say academic researchers, money managers and investment specialists, is yes -- as long as you approach the stock market as an investor.
But, they say, people shouldn't try to be traders, who buy and sell in an effort to ride the latest economic trend or catch the next hot stock. 

The case for owning stocks over the long-term is compelling. 

"If you look at 75 years worth of investment history -- including the Great Depression and every bear market since -- stocks have outperformed almost everything an individual could have owned by a long shot," says Barry Berlin, vice president at First Wachovia Capital Management. 

A dollar invested in the stock market in 1926 would have grown to $473.29 by the end of last June, according to Laurence Siegel, managing director at Ibbotson Associates Inc.
But a dollar invested in long-term bonds in 1926 would have grown to only $16.56, and a dollar put in Treasury bills would equal a meager $9.29. 

The longer the time period, the less risk there is of losing money in the stock market.
Over time, the odds increasingly favor the investor with a diversified portfolio.
For instance, Ken Gregory, a San Francisco money manager, calculates that if an investor holds a basket of stocks that tracks the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, the chance of losing money is 3% to 4% over a 10-year period, compared with 15% over three years and 30% over one year. 

"If you don't need the money for 10 years, there's a clear-cut case for sticking to a steady core of stocks," Mr. Gregory says. 

Stock-market investments also help balance the other assets an individual owns, says John Blankenship Jr., president of the Institute of Certified Financial Planners.
Stocks have a place in an investors' portfolio along with real estate, bonds, international securities and cash, he says. 

There are some important caveats: Before investing in stocks, individuals should have at least three to six months of living expenses set aside in the bank, most investment advisers say.
Individuals also should focus on building equity in a home, which provides some protection against inflation, as well as a nest-egg that can be cashed in late in life to help cover the cost of retirement living. 

People also shouldn't invest money in stocks that they'll need in the near future -- for example, for college tuition payments or retirement expenses. "You may have to sell your stocks at a time when the market takes a plunge," says Mr. Blankenship, a Del Mar, Calif. financial planner. 

But once the basics are covered, "then I would start to invest, even if it's as little as $1,000," says Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
He says individuals should consider not just stocks, but other long-term investments, such as high-quality bonds. 

Despite the strong case for stocks, however, most pros warn that individuals shouldn't try to profit from short-term developments. "It's very difficult to do," says Donald Holt, a market strategist for Wedbush Morgan Securities, a Los Angeles brokerage firm. "Our markets move so fast and they are so volatile, there's no way the average investor can compete with the pros." 

Individual investors face high transaction costs of moving in and out of the market.
The cost of executing stock orders varies from brokerage to brokerage and with the size of the order, but 2% of the order's value is an average, says Stephen Boesel, manager of T. Rowe Price's Growth and Income mutual fund. 

And assuming their first investment is successful, investors will have to pay taxes on their gains.
That can reduce returns by a third or more, once local taxes are included, Mr. Lipper says.
After that, individual traders face the risk that the new investment they choose won't perform well -- so their trading costs could be sustained for nothing. 

"It's very tough for most individuals to out-trade the mutual funds or the market," says Mr. Lipper. "You should really think twice if you think you can out-smart the system." 

Then, too, many individual investors lack the sturdy emotional makeup professionals say is needed to plunge in and out of the market. 

So what's the best way to buy stocks? "Unless an individual has a minimum of between $50,000 and $100,000 to invest in stocks, he's still better off in mutual funds than in individual stocks, in terms of getting enough attention from a competent broker," says Mr. Lipper. 

Still, he adds, "I could see owning both, given that individuals often have an advantage over big investors in spotting special situations based on their own insights," he adds. 

George Douglas, first vice president at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., says that individuals have a particular edge now in "small to medium-size niche companies with exciting earnings prospects" -- a traditional stomping ground for small investors.
This growth sector, which usually carries a price/earnings multiple about twice that of the Standard & Poor's 500, happens to include some of the market's most attractive bargains right now. "It's now selling at a multiple about even with the market," says Mr. Douglas. 

Moreover, Mr. Douglas sees a revival of institutional interest in smaller growth stocks that could boost the performance of these stocks in the medium term.
Many big Wall Street brokerage firms who eliminated their research effort in stocks of emerging growth companies a few years ago are now resuming coverage of this area, he notes. "We're seeing a real turnaround in interest in small growth stocks," he says. 

The pros strenuously advise individuals to stay away from the latest investment fad.
They say that's especially important this late in the growth phase of the economic cycle, when there's no robust bull market to bail investors out of their mistakes. 

Friday's correction presents "a pretty good buying opportunity, but let's not speculate at this point in the business cycle," says Carmine Grigoli, chief equity portfolio strategist at First Boston Corp. "Buy stocks on weakness for their long-term fundamentals," he says. 

In the long run, investment advisers say, most investors will be better off using the dollar-cost averaging method of buying stocks.
In this method, a person invests a regular amount every month or quarter into the stock market whether the market is up or down.
That cuts the risk, Mr. Gregory, the San Francisco money manager, points out. 

"When the market is low, you are buying more shares, and when it's high, you're buying fewer shares," he says.
Otherwise, if you put all your money in at one time, by sheer bad luck, you might pick a terrible time, and have to wait three years to get even, Mr. Gregory says. 

A disciplined program will work the best, Mr. Boesel says. "One of the hardest things to do is to buy stocks when the market is down," he says. "But's that just the time when you should be buying them." 

Compound annual returns, including price changes and income from interest and dividends 

*Actual performance, not annualized 

Source: Ibbotson Associates Inc. 

