.START 

Polaroid Corp. 's patent-infringement damages case against Eastman Kodak Co., one of the highest stakes corporate trials ever, is getting scant attention on Wall Street. 

After 78 days of mind-numbing testimony in federal court in Boston, the trial is being all but ignored by analysts and patent attorneys.
Most have read the pre-trial documents, however, and estimate Kodak will be ordered to pay $1 billion to $1.5 billion for infringing on seven Polaroid patents.
That may be the largest patent award ever, but it is well below the $12 billion Polaroid seeks. 

The highest patent damage award to date was in 1986, when Smith International Inc. was ordered to pay $205 million to Baker Hughes Inc. for infringing on a patent on an oil drilling bit seal.
The two companies later agreed to settle for $95 million. 

Few analysts think it is worth their time to slog through the Polaroid trial testimony. "It's like panning for gold outside of Grand Central Station.
You might find something, but the chances are low," said Michael Ellman, an analyst at Wertheim Schroder & Co. 

And Eugene Glazer, an analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., said: "If you hired an attorney to be there all the time and give you a (prediction) of the eventual award, I would be willing to bet that he would be off" by a lot. 

A 75-day trial in the early 1980s determined that Kodak, based in Rochester, N.Y., infringed on patents of Polaroid, of Cambridge, Mass.
The main issues remaining are how to calculate damages and whether the infringement was "willful and deliberate." If so, the damages could be tripled. 

Two analysts who have read the transcripts, David Nelson of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and Calvert D. Crary, a litigation analyst at Labe, Simpson & Co., think Judge A. David Mazzone will decide in Kodak's favor on the "willful and deliberate" issue. 

Mr. Crary said testimony by Kodak's patent counsel, Francis T. Carr of Kenyon & Kenyon, showed that "he worked with Kodak continuously from the outset of the project" in an effort to avoid infringement. "Carr told Kodak on many occasions to avoid various features because of Polaroid's patent positions," and Kodak followed his advice in every instance, Mr. Crary said. 

But Irving Kayton, a patent expert at George Mason University School of Law who is familiar with the case, said the fact that seven patents were infringed "suggests that infringement was willful.
It's difficult to be that consistently wrong." 

Observers also wonder whether Judge Mazzone will use the lost-profits method of determining damages, which Polaroid favors because it would result in a larger award, or the reasonable royalty method.
Polaroid claims it could have manufactured and sold all the instant cameras and film sold by Kodak if Kodak hadn't entered the market.
Moreover, Polaroid contends it could have sold them at a higher price -- and thus made higher profits -- because it wouldn't have been forced to match Kodak's lower prices. 

Each side has called a Harvard Business School professor to testify on that issue.
Kodak hired Robert Buzzell and Polaroid brought in Robert J. Dolan. "There's nothing that says that people at Harvard Business school have to agree with each other," said Mr. Buzzell. 

Testimony is expected to continue until early December.
A decision isn't expected until some time next year. 

