.START 

E. Robert Wallach, former personal legal adviser to ex-Attorney General Edwin Meese, was sentenced to six years in prison and fined $250,000 for his role in the Wedtech Corp. scandal. 

Mr. Wallach, 55 years old, was convicted in August of racketeering and conspiring to commit fraud.
The charges involved $425,000 in payments he got from Wedtech in return for promising to use his influence with Mr. Meese and other federal officials on behalf of the now-defunct defense contractor. 

Though Mr. Wallach's attorney, Gary Naftalis, described the defendant as "a relatively minor player" in the Wedtech political-corruption case, U.S. District Judge Richard Owen strongly disagreed.
At the sentencing in federal court in New York, Judge Owen told Mr. Wallach: "You sold your federal office and the integrity of your federal office for $300,000 before you even got the office." 

The money was allegedly paid to Mr. Wallach in anticipation of his being appointed to a top position in the Justice Department, but that appointment was never made.
Wedtech, a minority-owned company in New York City's South Bronx, accounted for the payments as consulting fees, though no services were actually provided, the government charged. 

Mr. Wallach's co-defendants, W. Franklyn Chinn and R. Kent London, were also sentenced.
Mr. Chinn, formerly a financial adviser to Mr. Meese, was sentenced to three years and fined $100,000.
Mr. London, who along with Mr. Chinn worked as a financial consultant to Wedtech, was sentenced to five years and fined $250,000.
The defendants, who remain free on bail pending their appeals, would have to serve a third of their sentences before being eligible for parole.
Lawyers for the three defendants have said they plan to appeal. 

Before issuing the sentences, Judge Owen criticized Mr. Wallach for a host of alleged ethical and legal improprieties, some of which had nothing to do with the Wedtech case and most of which involved Mr. Meese.
The judge also suggested that Mr. Wallach tried to influence the jury in August when the verdict was being read. 

About halfway through the verdict, Mr. London's mother had a seizure and collapsed in the front row of the courtroom.
As court officers sought to get help for the woman, the judge said, Mr. Wallach "charged at the jury and screamed, `You see what you have done. '" The judge said he didn't understand why Mr. Wallach, an experienced trial lawyer, would commit such an outburst, but he said Mr. Wallach may have hoped the jury would be unable to continue with its verdict. 

After the sentencing, Mr. Wallach blamed his Wedtech woes on his longtime friendship with Mr. Meese.
He said prosecutors "were looking for a man between Ed Meese and Wedtech. . . . If they could have gotten Ed Meese that would have been the fulfillment of the dreams." 

The defendants also face stiff forfeiture penalties because they were convicted under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law.
The judge ordered that the defendants turn over all the money earned through the racketeering enterprise.
For Mr. Wallach, the amount is $425,000.
Mr. London must forfeit $99,000, and Mr. Chinn must forfeit $20,000; together, Mr. Chinn and Mr. London must jointly forfeit an additional $1.14 million. 

Mr. Naftalis said Mr. Wallach had been "financially devastated" by the Wedtech scandal.
According to a corrected pre-sentencing report, Mr. Wallach currently has a negative net worth of $273,000. 

TEAMSTERS ELECTIONS will be supervised by court-appointed officer. 

U.S. District Judge David Edelstein of New York ruled that the elections officer will play an extensive role in all phases of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters' 1991 election of top union officials. 

The government hailed the ruling as a major victory in its quest to achieve broad reforms in the union, particularly the election of top officials by the rank and file. 

But Teamsters counsel James Grady claimed that the power bestowed upon the court-appointed officer was a departure from the terms of the union's agreement with the government earlier this year.
Mr. Grady added that to fund the type of supervision Judge Edelstein described would cost the union at least $3.5 million. 

In March, the Teamsters agreed to a settlement of civil racketeering charges brought by the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan.
In its suit, the government claimed organized crime figures had routinely picked top union officials. 

Under the settlement terms, union leaders agreed that a court-appointed administrator, investigator and elections official would oversee union activities for three years.
Also, the union agreed to pay all expenses related to the officers' oversight. 

But in his first progress report, filed two weeks ago, Administrator Frederick B. Lacey revealed some disagreements over the scope of such oversight, the interpretation of the settlement, and financial support. 

After the judge's ruling, Mr. Grady said, "We gave up our right to a trial for the terms of the {agreement}, and we believe that anything that modifies those terms is completely inappropriate." 

JUDGE'S COMMENTS on homosexual murder victims are scrutinized. 

A special master, appointed by the Texas Supreme Court, received evidence yesterday about comments made by Dallas District Judge Jack Hampton in the wake of a murder trial in December. 

Judge Hampton sentenced the 18-year-old defendant to 30 years in state prison for killing two homosexual men in a city park.
The judge was then quoted in the Dallas Times Herald as referring to the victims as "queers" and saying "these guys wouldn't have been killed if they hadn't been cruising the streets picking up teen-age boys." 

The comments touched off a furor in the Dallas gay community and prompted several complaints about Judge Hampton to the State Commission on Judicial Conduct.
The commission, which could remove Judge Hampton from the bench, will act after reviewing findings to be submitted within two weeks by special master Robert R. Murray of San Antonio. 

At a hearing yesterday, Judge Hampton's defense team, which included former Dallas County District Attorney Henry Wade and former U.S. Attorney Jim Rolfe, accused the Times Herald reporter of misquoting the judge.
The defense lawyers also argued that it was appropriate for the judge to consider whether the murder victims were committing a crime at the time they were killed. 

But Bill Hornung, general counsel for the judicial-conduct commission, said the defense team was sidestepping the focus of the inquiry -- whether Judge Hampton violated judicial ethics by commenting to the public while a motion for new trial was pending. 

"The place where a judge can comment and explain his rationale {for sentencing} is from the bench . . . not in the privacy of a little impromptu press conference," Mr. Hornung said. 

SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE gets legislation to limit death-penalty appeals. 

Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.), committee chairman, proposed legislation that would carry out the streamlining of death-penalty appeals in federal court that was proposed last month by a special task force appointed by Chief Justice of the U.S. William Rehnquist.
Sen. Biden proposed the legislation to comply with a law passed last year requiring the Senate to expedite consideration of proposals made by the task force, led by retired Supreme Court Justice Lewis Powell. 

The task force proposed that states provide lawyers to death-row inmates for civil, post-conviction lawsuits, called habeas corpus cases, in which they challenge the constitutionality of their convictions.
In exchange, the number of such lawsuits each inmate may file would be sharply curtailed, allowing states greater certainty of being able to execute those on death row.
When Chief Justice Rehnquist sent the report to Congress, a majority of federal judges on the policy-making Judicial Conference complained they hadn't been given a chance to consider the recommendations. 

The legislation introduced by Sen. Biden adopts the same approach as the Powell report: state-provided lawyers, in exchange for limiting appeals.
But the senator's bill eases a number of the restrictions. 

Leslie Harris, an American Civil Liberties Union spokeswoman criticized the Powell proposals, but said the Biden legislation is "a more moderate, thoughtful approach," although the group will likely oppose it. 

APPLE COMPUTER Inc. 's former general counsel John P. Karalis joined the Phoenix, Ariz., law firm of Brown & Bain.
Mr. Karalis, 51, will specialize in corporate law and international law at the 110-lawyer firm.
Before joining Apple in 1986, he served as general counsel at Sperry Corp. 

