.START 

Houston attorney Dale Friend, representing a plaintiff in a damage suit, says he has negotiated a settlement that will strike a blow for his client.
Literally. 

It turns out Mr. Friend's client, Machelle Parks of Cincinnati, didn't like the way defense attorney Tom Alexander acted during the legal proceedings.
So she has agreed to forgo monetary damages against Mr. Alexander's client in return for the right to punch the attorney.
Ms. Parks's mother also gets to cuff Mr. Alexander.
So does Mr. Friend and his law partner, Nick Nichols. 

The bizarre arrangement grows out of Mr. Alexander's representation of Derr Construction Co., one of several defendants in a wrongful death lawsuit brought by Ms. Parks, the widow of a construction worker killed in January 1987 while working on a new Houston convention center.
Last month, Mr. Friend says, Mr. Alexander's associate agreed that Derr would pay $50,000 as part of an overall settlement. 

But Mr. Alexander scuttled the deal at the last minute, angering the plaintiff's side. "I never agreed to it," Mr. Alexander says, adding that "it's not necessary to pay these nuisance settlements." 

When Ms. Parks and her mother heard about what had happened, Mr. Friend says, they volunteered that they would like to give Mr. Alexander a good walloping.
Mr. Friend says he passed that along to his adversary, and soon they were talking about the ground rules under which Derr could keep its money and the plaintiffs could take a shot at Mr. Alexander. 

Although time and place have yet to be determined, some details are in place.
Mr. Friend says he agreed to strike Mr. Alexander above the belt.
Ms. Parks and her mother indicated they want to "catch him unawares from behind," he says.
Mr. Alexander, for his part, insisted that the punchers can't assign their pummeling rights to anyone else, can't use a blunt instrument and can't take a running start. 

Mr. Alexander says he regards the agreement, which hasn't been submitted to a judge, as something of a joke.
However, he acknowledges they "have the option of taking a swat at me if they really want to." Mr. Friend says his side is "dead serious." Although they don't contemplate delivering any disabling blows, he says that Mr. Alexander will be asked to sign a release from liability, just in case. 

