.START 

As stocks recovered, the U.S. dollar rebounded, but bond prices plunged and Treasury bill rates soared. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average's 88.12-point bounce back from Friday's 190-point dive helped calm investor fears of a financial Armageddon.
However, gold prices rose despite the dollar's resilience, reflecting continued nervousness about the markets' manic behavior. 

Early yesterday, strategists at several investment firms, including Merrill Lynch and Dean Witter Reynolds, urged customers to buy stocks and cut back on bonds.
Treasury bond prices dropped the most for any single day in more than two months.
The 30-year bond lost 1 3/4 points, or $17.50 for each $1,000 face amount.
Treasury bill rates, which fell nearly three-quarters of a percentage point Friday as investors sought a safe haven from plunging stocks, jumped more than half a percentage point yesterday. 

"Investors had expected the worst from the stock market, and so they piled into government bonds last Friday," said Steven Einhorn, chairman of the investment policy committee at Goldman, Sachs & Co. "But when we didn't get the worst, there was some movement out of bonds and back into stocks" yesterday.
Mr. Einhorn early yesterday told Goldman traders and salesmen that he recommends investors increase their stock holdings. 

Speculation that the Federal Reserve stands ready to act as a safety net for the financial system helped restore investor confidence yesterday, said Mitchell Shivers, president of Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc.
Many investment managers expect the Fed to ease credit further in coming weeks to bolster the economy. 

In major market activity: 

Bond prices plummeted, reversing Friday's big gains.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue rose to 7.97%. 

The dollar bounced back in the currency markets.
In New York very late yesterday, it was quoted at 141.80 Japanese yen and 1.8685 West German marks, up from 141.50 yen and 1.8655 marks late Friday. 

