.START 

In what is believed to be the first cancellation of a loan to China since the June 4 killings in Beijing, an international bank syndicate has terminated a $55 million credit for a Shanghai property project. 

The syndicate, led by Schroders Asia Ltd., agreed last November to provide the loan to Asia Development Corp., a U.S. property developer.
But several weeks ago, in the wake of the Beijing killings, the loan was canceled, according to bankers and executives close to the project.
Asia Development and Schroders declined to comment on the move. 

Lenders had doubts about the project even before June 4, but the harsh crackdown, which caused many businesses to reassess their China transactions, "gave the banks the out they wanted," says an official close to the Shanghai venture. 

The decision to cancel the loan exemplifies the tough attitude bankers have taken toward China since June 4.
While some commercial lending has resumed, international lenders remain nervous about China's economic troubles and foreign debt -- $40 billion at the end of 1988. 

Many loans are being renegotiated, especially those tied to the hotel sector, which has been hit hard by a post-June 4 tourism slump.
Many bankers view property-sector loans as particularly risky. 

The canceled Shanghai loan leaves Asia Development, a small concern, saddled with a half-completed 32-story apartment building and heavy debts.
The company owes $11 million to the Shui On Group, the project's Hong Kong contractor, and a significant, though unspecified, amount in legal fees to Coudert Brothers, a U.S. law firm, the sources say. 

The project, known as Lotus Mansion, has been mired in controversy.
When the loan agreement was announced, it was hailed as one of the first Western-style financing transactions ever used in China.
Unlike most loans to China, there was no Chinese guarantor.
Instead, the banks secured a promise from state-owned Bank of Communications that it would lend Asia Development the entire $55 million at maturity to finance repayment of the original borrowing.
The loan was to have matured in just two to three years, as soon as construction was completed. 

But in a letter sent in August to Asia Development, Schroders said the loan was terminated because the developer had failed to deliver adequate financial data and pay certain fees to the loan-management committee on time, according to officials close to the project.
Creditors involved in the project contend, however, that the termination actually had nothing to do with these technical violations. 

Instead, the creditors say, the loan fell victim to nervousness about China's political turmoil, as well as to concern about the loan's security.
The bank syndicate is made up mostly of European banks, but it includes China's state-owned Citic Industrial Bank. 

The 11 banks in the syndicate sustained no monetary losses because none of the credit facility had been drawn down. 

