.START 

Japanese Firms Push 

Posh Car Showrooms 

JAPANESE luxury-car makers are trying to set strict design standards for their dealerships.
But some dealers are negotiating looser terms, while others decline to deal at all. 

Nissan Motor Co. 's Infiniti division likes to insist that every dealer construct and furnish a building in a Japanese style.
Specifications include a polished bronze sculpture at the center of each showroom and a tile bridge spanning a stream that flows into the building from outside. 

"Infiniti has it down to the ashtrays," says Jay Ferron, a partner at J.D. Power & Associates, an auto research firm. 

Toyota Motor Corp. 's Lexus division also provides specifications.
But only two-thirds of Lexus dealers are constructing new buildings according to the Lexus specs.
Some are even coming up with their own novel designs.
In Louisville, Ky., for example, David Peterson has built a Lexus dealership with the showroom on the second floor. 

Yet some dealers have turned down Infiniti or Lexus franchises because they were unwilling or unable to meet the design requirements.
Lee Seidman of Cleveland says Infiniti "was a bear on interiors" but at least let him retrofit an existing building -- without the stream.
Mr. Seidman says he turned down a Lexus franchise in part because "the building was gorgeous but very expensive." 

To head off arguments, Infiniti offers dealers cash bonuses and low-interest construction loans. 

Dictation Device's Saga 

Plays Back a Lesson 

PRODUCTS DON'T have to be first to be winners.
That's the lesson offered through one case study featured in a design exhibit. 

Dictaphone Corp. was caught off guard in 1974 when its main competitor, Lanier Office Products of Japan, introduced a microcassette dictation recorder half the size of standard cassette devices.
Blocked by patent protection from following suit, Dictaphone decided to go a step further and cut the cassette in half again -- down to the length of a paperclip.
By 1979, designers and engineers at Dictaphone, a Pitney Bowes subsidiary, had produced a working model of a "picocassette" recorder. 

By 1982, however, the patent status of the Lanier microcassette had changed, permitting Dictaphone to develop its own competitive micro system, which it did.
Marketing and sales departments then urged abandonment of the pico project.
But others said pico should proceed.
Both were right. 

Dictaphone went ahead and introduced the pico in 1985, but it hasn't sold well.
To date, says Emil Jachmann, a Dictaphone vice president, it has "broken even or shown a small loss." 

Nevertheless, the device has been successful in other ways.
It helped Dictaphone attract better engineers, and it provided new technology for other company products.
The picocassette recorder also helped transform the company's reputation from follower to leading-edge innovator. 

"It gave me great pride to see the inventor of the microcassette in Japan look at the pico and shake his head and say `unbelievable, '" says Mr. Jachmann. 

Dictaphone's picocassette recorder is one of 13 case studies in the TRIAD Design Project, sponsored by the Design Management Institute of Boston and Harvard Business School.
The studies are on exhibit at Harvard this month and will travel to Chicago's Institute of Design and the University of California at Berkeley. 

A Rake's Progress 

Means Branching Out 

ONE DAY Carl Barrett of Mobile, Ala., was raking some sycamore leaves, but the rake kept riding up over the piles.
The harder he tried to push them into large piles, the closer he came to breaking the rake and straining his back. 

So Mr. Barrett, then vice president of the Alabama Steamship Association, took a steel-toothed garden rake and taped it to the underside of a leaf rake about nine inches up.
His crude device worked: The lower teeth gathered the leaves into a pile, while the higher, harder teeth moved the top of the pile.
Now incorporated into a polypropylene rake, the four-inch prongs, or "wonderbars," also are supposed to aid in picking up leaves. 

One customer, Donald Blaggs of Mobile, says the Barrett Rake allowed him to do his lawn in 2 1/2 hours, two hours less than usual. 

But other rake makers have their doubts.
Richard Mason, president of Ames Co. in Parkersburg, W. Va., says the Barrett rake "makes sense," but it would be "tough" to explain to consumers. 

John Stoner, marketing director for True Temper Corp., a subsidiary of Black & Decker, says people don't want to move a leaf pile. "They either pick it up," he says, "or they start pulling from a fresh direction." 

Odds and Ends NO MORE STUBBED toes or bruised shins, promises Geste Corp. of Goshen, Ind., the designer of a bed support to replace traditional frames.
Four tubular steel "Bedfellows," each roughly in the shape of a "W," are attached to the bottom of the box spring in a recessed position. . . . Nearly half of U.S. consumers say they'll pay up to 5% more for packaging that can be recycled or is biodegradable, according to a survey commissioned by the Michael Peters Group, a design consultant. 

