.START 

K mart Corp. agreed to acquire Pace Membership Warehouse Inc. for $23 a share, or $322 million, in a move to expand its presence in the rapidly growing warehouse-club business. 

The proposed merger comes as K mart's profit is declining and sales at its core discount stores are rising more slowly than at such competitors as Wal-Mart Stores Inc. K mart, based in Troy, Mich., recently said net income would fall for the third consecutive quarter, after a 16% drop in the first half of its current fiscal year. 

"The membership warehouse-club concept has great potential," the company's chairman, Joseph E. Antonini, said in a statement.
Warehouse clubs typically carry general merchandise and food products, which they sell for close to wholesale prices in no-frills stores.
Shoppers, many of whom operate small businesses, pay annual membership fees, which provide an income base for the stores. 

K mart tested the warehouse-club sector last year with its acquisition of a 51% interest in Makro Inc.
But the Makro chain, which operates as a joint venture between K mart and SHV Holdings N.V. of the Netherlands, has only six stores and annual sales that one analyst estimated at about $300 million. 

Six-year-old Pace, based in Aurora, Colo., operates 41 warehouse-club stores.
The company had losses for several years before turning profitable in fiscal 1988.
In the year ended Jan. 31, Pace rang up profit of $9.4 million, or 72 cents a share, after a tax-loss carry-forward, on sales of $1.3 billion, and analysts expect its results to continue to improve. 

"The company turned the corner fairly recently in profitability," said Margo McGlade of PaineWebber Inc., who had been forecasting a 46% jump in Pace's net income from operations this year and another 42% increase next year. "Warehouse productivity is really beginning to take off." 

But some analysts contend K mart has agreed to pay too much for Pace. "Even if you look at it as a turnaround situation, it's expensive," said Wayne Hood of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. "In my opinion, you would only pay that kind of price if you were getting a premier player in the industry." 

Ms. McGlade of PaineWebber raised a more fundamental question about the deal. "If K mart can't get its act together in discounting, why is it spending time worrying about other growing markets?" She said, "I would say K mart's number one job is to address its market-share loss {in discount stores}, which longer-term will lead to improved profit margins.
At that point, perhaps diversification would be appropriate." 

But K mart's Mr. Antonini is intent on pushing the company into new retail businesses.
For instance, K mart is opening big food and general merchandise stores, called hypermarkets, and warehouse-type stores specializing in office products and sporting goods.
It also operates Waldenbooks, Pay Less Drug Stores and Builders Square home improvement stores. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, K mart closed yesterday at $36 a share, up 12.5 cents.
Pace rose $2.625 to close at $22.125 a share in national over-the-counter trading. 

A K mart spokesman said the acquisition would be financed with short-term borrowings. 

Under terms of the agreement, a K mart subsidiary will soon make a tender offer for Pace shares.
Among the conditions of the offer is that Pace shareholders tender a majority of the company's shares outstanding.
The companies said Pace would ill continue to operate under its present management. 

