.START 

The nine major domestic auto makers plan to build 10.4% fewer cars in this year's fourth quarter than they built a year ago, with the Big Three accounting for nearly all of the decline. 

Continuing a trend that is putting intense pressure on General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., output at Japanese-owned and managed plants will rise 42% from year-earlier levels to an estimated 296,187 cars.
Production at Big Three plants is forecast to fall 17% to 1,402,000 cars. 

Some of the decline at the Big Three is production shifted to the "transplants": Diamond-Star Motors Corp. builds cars sold by Chrysler as well as Mitsubishi Motors Corp. Mazda Motor Corp. 's U.S. plant builds cars for its own and Ford dealers.
New United Motor Manufacturing Inc. supplies GM's Chevrolet and Toyota Motor Corp. 's U.S. dealer networks. 

The only transplants to drop below 1988 levels are owned by Mazda and Honda Motor Co. Part of the Mazda decline reflects "trying to anticipate what sales" are going to be, said a spokesman.
Mazda also is adding the Mazda 626 car at its Flat Rock, Mich., plant, slowing output.
Honda is accelerating production after retooling its Marysville, Ohio, plant to build the redesigned Accord. 

The overall decline in car production is matched by an almost equal drop of 10.6% in expected truck output at GM, Ford, Chrysler and Nissan Motor Corp. Car and truck sales are expected to soften during the remainder of the year from unusually high, incentive-buoyed levels in August and September. 

"None of it is a surprise," said Edward Sullivan, vice president of automotive consulting at the WEFA Group, a market analysis firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa. "Strong third-quarter sales stole from fourth-quarter sales." He said schedules at GM, in particular, are still too high given market expectations, which will likely mean some trimming.
But "if the cuts are going to come, they'll have to come pretty soon," he added. "Once you get into November there's not a whole lot of flexibility." 

The recent gyrations in the stock market didn't have any immediate impact on the auto makers' schedules. "Based on the minimal impact that the 1987 event had on car sales, this little hiccup is unlikely to have any influence," said a Ford spokesman. 

Here are industry forecasts for the fourth quarter: 

Much of the difference in Chrysler's car output compared with a year ago comes from having two fewer plants; Chrysler's now-shuttered facilities in Kenosha, Wis., turned out 51,000 subcompacts and mid-size cars in the 1988 fourth-quarter before it closed in December. 

More than half the decline in Ford's expected car output comes from closing its Escort plant in Wayne, Mich., as of Nov. 22 to prepare for production of the next generation of the popular subcompact.
The plant won't reopen until late February or early March, the company spokesman said.
The lower output will likely mean the subcompacts will lose for the first time since the 1985 model year their distinction as the best-selling car in the U.S. 

Honda's Accord, made in the U.S. and Japan, was a close second to Escort in the just-ended 1989 model year.
If Accord were to top the list in 1990, it would be the first vehicle from a foreign auto maker ever to hold that spot. 

