.START 

Despite turmoil created by a costly S&L bailout and the growing realization that a government guarantee may become a taxpayer liability, some members of Congress are insistent on using tax dollars as collateral for risky and unnecessary government-backed deals. 

This appears to be the case with the Federal Housing Administration's mortgage guarantee program.
A program created to assist low- to moderate-income people, it may soon be expanded to accommodate much higher loan amounts for well-to-do home purchasers.
The FHA now holds a 50% share of the mortgage insurance market, while mismanagement prevails throughout the agency. 

The General Accounting Office has just completed an FHA financial audit showing a loss of $4.2 billion for fiscal 1988.
Significant losses are also expected for the fiscal year just ended.
Congress should not consider any expansion of FHA until a comprehensive, proven plan for FHA solvency and reform is established. 

Ignoring the FHA losses, a few of my colleagues have pushed for expansion of FHA mortgage guarantees by including wealthier home purchasers in the program.
The National Affordable Housing Act (Cranston-D'Amato), introduced earlier this year, erases the current mortgage guarantee ceiling of $101,250 and places a "floating cap" at 95% of the median home price in higher-cost areas. 

While it increases FHA loan-guarantee amounts, this bill also calls for the reduction of down-payment requirements.
Legislation of this nature can be likened to fueling a runaway locomotive headed in the wrong direction. 

Studies consistently show, and the GAO has admitted, that increasing loan-to-value ratios -- making higher loans without higher down-payment requirements -- increases the risk of default.
Taxpayers will be saddled with a tremendous financial burden if these fundamental data are not heeded. 

Recently, a Senate Appropriations bill similarly removed the current FHA mortgage guarantee ceiling and increased it to 95% of the median home price in higher-cost areas.
This provision would have nearly doubled FHA loan exposure in skyrocketing markets where median home prices can range to $200,000 or more. 

Out of concern for the potentially damaging effects of this proposal, and still awaiting the GAO report on FHA losses, I suggested the Senate instead work on ways to eliminate or substantially curtail this vast loan-guarantee expansion.
After several hours of floor debate and three roll-call votes, we reached a compromise, placing the FHA loan-guarantee ceiling at $124,875.
Although my desire to retain the present ceiling was exceeded by $23,625, a firm limit on loan guarantees did provide some consolation in the face of allowing a haphazard floating cap to remain in the bill. 

Not only is such an FHA expansion risky, it is also a direct government intrusion into a market already served by private mortgage insurers.
Private mortgage insurers also happen to be solvent.
Yes, they have higher down-payment requirements.
But people who can afford payments on a $200,000 home should be expected to put more money down. 

It would be difficult to explain to average American workers that their tax dollars were being used to guarantee mortgages on $200,000 homes.
If an FHA expansion is such a great idea, why not have the federal government guarantee all home mortgages?
Congress cannot expect taxpayers to continue bearing the burden of well-intended government guarantees. 

When Congress increased federal deposit insurance to $100,000 from $40,000, it seemed like a good idea.
It gave the appearance of a more stable financial industry.
It was easy to extend a government guarantee to cover apparent problems.
But postponing problems soon gave way to a nightmarish taxpayer bailout to the tune of over $200 billion. 

The problems surrounding the FHA must be addressed.
Significant reforms must be made.
The high-risk venture of unnecessarily expanding FHA mortgage guarantees without reform is ludicrous. 

Sen. Nickles (R., Okla.) sits on the Appropriations and Budget committees. 

(See related story: "The Home Builders' Wish-List" -- WSJ Oct. 17, 1989) 

