.START 

The metal and marble lobby of CenTrust Bank's headquarters is grander than your average savings and loan.
For one thing, there is an old master on the wall -- "Samuel Anointing David," a big baroque canvas painted by Mattia Preti, a 17th-century Neapolitan. 

At the moment, however, the painting is a nagging reminder of the problems that have engulfed CenTrust and its flamboyant chairman and chief executive, David L. Paul.
In an international buying spree that began barely two years ago, Mr. Paul amassed a collection of about 30 pre-18th-century works, including the Preti, at a total cost of $28 million. 

By midnight Oct. 6, all of the paintings were supposed to have been sold off, under orders from Florida's comptroller, whose office regulates the state's S&Ls.
CenTrust didn't meet the deadline. 

The collection was at the heart of a grandiose plan Mr. Paul had in which the art was to do double duty -- as an investment for CenTrust and as decoration for the S&L's new office tower, designed by I.M. Pei.
The rub is that the $28 million was plucked from the funds of this federally insured institution even as CenTrust was losing money hand over fist.
Mr. Paul had no right to buy art for the S&L in the first place -- it isn't on the comptroller's "permissible" list -- without seeking a special dispensation, which he did not do.
Besides that, some of the paintings that were to grace the walls of CenTrust actually ended up hanging in the chairman's estate on La Gorce Isle off Miami Beach. 

Last spring, the comptroller's office called a halt to Mr. Paul's fling, giving him six months to sell the paintings.
The acquisitions, officials said in a letter to Mr. Paul, were "unsafe, unsound and unauthorized." So far, Mr. Paul has unloaded but three of his masterpieces, he won't say to whom.
The comptroller's office says it is "monitoring the situation." Though the agency could remove Mr. Paul, it has no current intention to do that. 

"It's not like selling Chevrolets," Mr. Paul says, as he takes a drag on a goldbanded St. Moritz cigarette. "The last six months has established the quality of the collection.
There's no fire sale here." 

Despite Mr. Paul's characteristic hauteur, the 50-year-old, chain-smoking dynamo is finding that getting CenTrust -- Florida's largest thrift institution -- out of its riskiest investments is much tougher than getting into them had been.
Paintings are just part of the picture.
Although Mr. Paul has pared a $1.35 billion junk-bond portfolio to less than $900 million since April, the high-yield debt market has plummeted.
Divesting itself of what is left, as is required of all thrift institutions by July 1994 under the new federal S&L bailout law, may well prove difficult. 

And CenTrust has other problems.
Late last week federal regulators ordered the thrift institution to stop paying dividends on its preferred stock -- a move that suggests deep concern about an institution.
Mr. Paul has a plan to bring in $150 million by selling off 63 of CenTrust's 71 branches, but it has yet to be approved by regulators. 

It is Mr. Paul's art venture, however, that has drawn the most attention from investors and regulators, not to mention galleries throughout the world.
Embittered shareholders (some of whom are suing) say the chairman and his collection epitomize the excesses of speculation that set off the national S&L crisis. (CenTrust shares have fallen sharply in price from a high of $15.125 in 1986 to close yesterday at $2.875.) Gallery directors, meanwhile, say Mr. Paul and others of his ilk have left an indelible mark on the art world -- and not for the better. 

Collectors don't say "It's a van Gogh" anymore, laments Harry Brooks, the president of Wildenstein & Co., a New York gallery. "They say, `Johnny Payson got $53 million for his, so certainly $10 million isn't too much for mine. ' The great collectors we depended on, such as Paul Mellon or Norton Simon, have stopped buying, and the new buyers are brilliant men who made money in the stock market or in takeovers and rushed into collecting. . . ." Mr. Payson, an art dealer and collector, sold Vincent van Gogh's "Irises" at a Sotheby's auction in November 1987 to Australian businessman Alan Bond. (Trouble is, Mr. Bond has yet to pay up, and until he does, Sotheby's has the painting under lock and key.) 

When Mr. Paul moved in on the art market, he let it be known that virtually no piece was too costly to be considered by CenTrust. 

He established his reputation as a freespender in January last year at Sotheby's auction of the Linda and Gerald Guterman collection in New York.
There, on one of his first shopping trips, Mr. Paul picked up several paintings at stunning prices.
He paid $2.2 million, for instance, for a still life by Jan Jansz. den Uyl that was expected to fetch perhaps $700,000.
The price paid was a record for the artist. (Some 64% of items offered at the Guterman auction were sold, at an average price of $343,333.
The rest were withdrawn for lack of acceptable bids.) Afterward, Mr. Paul is said by Mr. Guterman to have phoned Mr. Guterman, the New York developer selling the collection, and gloated. 

"He says he `stole them, '" recalls Mr. Guterman. "And he tells me, `If you want to see your paintings, you'll have to come to my house in Florida. '" Mr. Paul denies phoning and gloating. "It's just not true," he says. 

Mr. Paul quickly became more aggressive in his collecting, with the help of George Wachter, a Sotheby's expert in old masters whom he met at an exhibition of the Guterman items.
Mr. Wachter, who became his principal adviser, searched galleries in London, Paris and Monaco.
And, according to one dealer, Mr. Wachter had a penchant for introducing Mr. Paul with the phrase: "He can buy anything." 

Nicholas Hall, the president of the Colnaghi U.S.A. Ltd. gallery in New York, sold Mr. Paul "Abraham and Sarah in the Wilderness" by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo.
Mr. Hall says Mr. Paul "was known to spend a lot of money.
People were interested in seeing him, but it was recognized that the route was through Sotheby's and particularly George Wachter." 

Mr. Paul thus developed a close, symbiotic relationship with Sotheby's.
Mr. Paul was eager to assemble a collection for the headquarters CenTrust has been moving into for the greater part of a year.
Sotheby's, the auction house founded in London 1744 and now under the umbrella of Sotheby's Holdings Inc., was hoping to stir up interest in old masters as it strove to build its U.S. business.
European dealers continued to dominate the action in old masters, which Sotheby's North America had lately been touting in this country. 

For several months, there was optimism all around.
Last October, Mr. Paul paid out $12 million of CenTrust's cash -- plus a $1.2 million commission -- for "Portrait of a Man as Mars." The painting, attributed to Flemish artist Peter Paul Rubens, was purchased privately through Sotheby's, not at auction. 

In March 1989, just 15 months into his campaign, Mr. Paul was named by Art & Antiques magazine as one of the top 100 individual collectors in the U.S. "An unknown quantity to most of the art world, Paul is no stranger to lavish spending," the magazine said, noting that he doesn't stop at paint on canvas but also spends big on art you can eat. "He recently bid $30,000 at a Paris charity auction for a dinner cooked by six of the world's great chefs, but the final party cost closer to $100,000." 
(Mr. Paul says it wasn't that high.) 

The art collection might have come to rival the Medicis' had the Florida comptroller's office not got wind of Mr. Paul's aesthetic adventure. 

In its letter to him, dated March 2 and shared with reporters, Alex Hager, the chief of the thrift-institution bureau in the comptroller's office, expressed puzzlement that the S&L could be so profligate when it had reported losses of more than $13 million in its two preceding quarters. 

The state gave CenTrust 30 days to sell the Rubens.
The comptroller's office eventually extended the deadline to six months but broadened its demands, ordering that the "book value of the collection {be} reduced to zero." In other words: Get rid of all the pictures.
The state obliquely noted that unsafe banking practices are grounds for removing an officer or director and closed with the admonition to Mr. Paul: "Govern yourself accordingly." 

The state agency was particularly vexed to learn that the Rubens and a half-dozen other paintings listed among the bank's "furniture and fixtures," were actually hanging in the chairman's house. 

Mr. Paul says that at one point he did indeed have eight or nine of the paintings at home and that the rest were in storage at Sotheby's.
He explains that he was "merely storing the paintings at home -- with some display -- because of the special dehumidified environment" required for their safekeeping, until CenTrust's new building was ready for them.
Still, the incident was embarrassing. 

It came on the heels of a number of local newspaper articles suggesting that Mr. Paul has benefited handsomely from his association with CenTrust.
For instance, he got a $3 million loan from the S&L, negotiated at a below-market rate.
He owns 43% of CenTrust's shares. 

Adding to Mr. Paul's problems, dealers (some with vested interests) insist that he, relying rather too heavily on Sotheby's advice, paid much too much for several pieces in the CenTrust collection.
The $12 million lavished on the Rubens, for example, was a record price for the artist and maybe twice its value, given a dispute among scholars about its provenance.
David Tunick, the president of David Tunick Inc., a New York gallery, says scholars question the authenticity of the Rubens.
It may have been painted instead by a Rubens associate. 

"The feeling among many experts on the commercial side is that the price paid at the time was excessive in any event," Mr. Tunick says. "It sounds like with the Rubens he got absolutely taken to the cleaners." 

Victor Wiener, the executive director of the Appraisers Association of America, agrees that Mr. Paul paid very dearly for the Rubens and adds that getting rid of it any time soon for a similar sum would be quite a feat. "It's not beyond credibility the Rubens will someday be worth $12 million, but whether it could be sold for that amount tomorrow remains to be seen." 

Still, predicting is tricky. "I'm forever dumbfounded by what I see making these high prices." 

Jonathan H. Kress, the son of the painting's former owner, Mrs. Rush Kress, dismisses the price talk as "sour grapes." Dealers contemptuous of the purchase price, he says, were themselves interested in buying the Rubens but lost out. 

Mr. Paul, for his part, defends the Rubens price, saying a lot of the experts have never seen the thing itself. "Most of them weren't even born the last time the painting was displayed publicly," he says. 

Art prices are skyrocketing, but a good deal of legerdemain is involved in compiling statistics on sales.
Salomon Brothers Inc., the investment-banking firm, in its annual tally of investment returns, reported that old masters appreciated 51% in the year ended June 1, the greatest return of any of 13 assets it tracked. (Impressionist and modern paintings, not tracked by Salomon, are ranked even higher at 74% by Sotheby's.) 

Salomon, moreover, gets its data on art appreciation from Sotheby's, whose prices go up with clients like Mr. Paul in its thrall.
The percentages omit from consideration the many paintings that go begging at auction.
Art indexes track winners, not losers.
But art that has fallen sharply in value is rarely put up for sale.
Also, at any of Sotheby's auctions of old masters, roughly one-third to one-fifth of what is offered doesn't sell at any price.
It's not that there aren't any bids, but the bids don't meet the minimum "reserve" prices set by the sellers. 

In January, the Preti painting that now hangs at CenTrust was expected to bring no more than $700,000 at auction until Mr. Paul came along with his $1.15 million. 

Mr. Hall of the Colnaghi gallery says $1.15 million "would have been an impossible price for anyone to ask for a Preti four years ago." But from his vantage point, it isn't that Mr. Paul, a customer of his too, overpaid for the work, "a gargantuan painting by an artist who is not a household word." (The painting is 10 feet wide, seven feet high.) Rather, "It just shows things have changed." 

Mr. Paul boasts that he spotted bargains in old masters just before they took an upward turn. "They went up 51% last year, and they'll do it again this year," he declares. "They were a sleeper.
Everybody was out buying Monets." Sotheby's vice president Diana Levitt says the auction house has been "assisting" Mr. Paul in selling the paintings.
And while Sotheby's chief rivals in the art world, private art dealers, "won't be happy to hear it," she adds, "a number of {the artworks} have already been sold, and at a substantial profit." Mr. Paul claims to have sold three paintings, at more than a 10% profit.
That isn't 51%, and the claim isn't documented. 

He furthermore denies that he relied too heavily on Sotheby's or Mr. Wachter.
Mr. Paul says he had not one but four advisers and that he never bid impulsively.
After all, he had the counsel of "curators from the most reputable museums in the world." He says he expects to sell the collection -- including the controversial Rubens -- "carefully and prudently, just as it was put together." 

But in art-world parlance, Mr. Paul's holdings are "burnt." That is, he is being compelled to put them on the market too soon, and has already gotten offers that are less than he paid for some of the art works. "After a few years, you can argue there has been natural appreciation," says Susan Theran, the publisher of Leonard's Annual Price Index of Art Auctions. But quick turnover in artwork is "like pawning your jewelry -- you end up with 50%.
People hold out and try to get a bargain." 

Sotheby's defends itself and Mr. Paul in the matter.
Mr. Wachter says Mr. Paul was a quick study who worked intensely and bought the best pictures available at the moment. "On occasion, he paid a high price," Mr. Wachter concedes, but he says those who bid less and dropped out were dealers who would then have marked up the paintings to resell them at a profit to collectors. 

Naomi Bernhard Levinson, a fine-arts appraiser at Bernhard Associates in San Francisco, considers it "definite conflict of interest for an auction house to both advise a client on purchases and to set price estimates on the paintings to be purchased." Sotheby's, she says, is "wearing both hats." 

"I can't see why there would be a conflict of interest," says Sotheby's Ms. Levitt. "Estimates are based on the previous price of similar works sold at auction and current market conditions, and are not affected by any knowledge of who the potential buyer could be." Frequently, clients express interest in paintings but don't end up bidding, she adds, "so we don't know who the potential buyer will be." 

Mr. Paul, in selling off his paintings, is seeking at least a 15% return on the bank's investment, so as to prove that the venture was sound.
Mr. Paul says that he has feelers out over much of the globe and that potential buyers from as far away as Japan and Italy have examined the collection. 

Because of the pressure on CenTrust to sell, dealers and collectors have been trying to get the paintings at bargain-basement prices.
But so far, Mr. Paul and his advisers are holding fast. 

One dealer, Martin Zimet of French & Co. in New York, says he "would have loved to buy" a Jan Davids de Heem painting from the bank. "I tried to steal the picture -- to buy it attractively -- and {Sotheby's} wouldn't do it.
They were protecting his interests." 

Meanwhile, Mr. Paul and CenTrust executives are getting squeamish about opulence.
Mr. Paul has been characterized as "the Great Gatsby or something," complains Karen E. Brinkman, an executive vice president of CenTrust.
The media, she says, have distorted his personal life. 

Mr. Paul nods in agreement. "I don't think I have a life style that is, frankly, so flamboyant," he says.
But at just that moment, he is interrupted in his office by a servant in tuxedo who pours coffee from silver into a cup of china and dabs the brim with linen. 

Mr. Paul says, yes, the ceiling in his executive suite is gold-leaf inlay.
The offices are done in hardwood and oriental rugs, leatherbound books and, of course, a $12 million Rubens.
But he implores that the splendor be played down. 

"Don't say it's a gold ceiling.
Just say the offices are tastefully appointed," he says. "Otherwise, the regulators will take it for decadence, and nowadays everything's got to be pristine." 

Figures don't include taxes or transaction costs. 

