.START 

In a sign of its continuing problems in the U.S. auto market, General Motors Corp. acknowledged that a key midsized-car plant will shut down for two weeks to cut bulging inventories of Pontiac Grand Prix models. 

Meanwhile, GM Chairman Roger B. Smith said it should be "no surprise" the auto maker is moving to close permanently more North American assembly plants.
At an Economic Club of Detroit luncheon, Mr. Smith said announcements last week that indicated at least three and perhaps five more GM plants in the U.S. and Canada may close by the early 1990s reflect "a carefully conceived, calculated and executed strategic plan." 

Mr. Smith said GM is looking for ways to save some of the five older plants targeted last week. "I'm hoping we'll need another plant for the APV," a new plastic-bodied minivan now being assembled at a single plant in Tarrytown, N.Y., he said.
However, Mr. Smith said that as a result of a $70 billion factory-modernization program undertaken over the last decade, "we can produce more in the new plants than we could in the old plants." 

But GM is also struggling with a steep decline in U.S. car-market share that wasn't part of the company's strategic plans when it began the modernization program.
The latest evidence of that is the decision to idle the Fairfax, Kan., plant that makes the Grand Prix less than three weeks into the new model year. 

The Grand Prix is one of GM's newest lines of cars, the so-called GM-10 midsized cars.
This fall, GM introduced the first four-door versions of the cars -- a move that was supposed to spur sales of the models, which have been disappointing so far. 

But GM officials confirmed they will close the Fairfax plant for two weeks beginning Oct. 30 because of slow sales, bringing to 10 the number of weeks it will have been closed since early June.
U.S. car dealers had a 92-day supply of the cars at the end of September, according to industry trade publication Wards Automotive Reports.
That's about 50% higher than the 60-to-65-day supply considered normal in the industry. 

Union officials at the Fairfax plant said the company is studying the feasibility of giving the plant another product to build, contrary to GM's original plan.
Company officials declined to comment on this issue, calling the talk "speculation." 

