.START 

While investors were keeping a close eye on stock-market indicators yesterday, securities regulators focused on Wall Street's back offices to ensure that customer funds were safe. 

Securities and Exchange Commission officials said they called heads of firms, traders and other brokerage staffers to make sure the houses had enough capital and back-office resources to handle the crush of sell orders during the first few hours of trading yesterday. 

"We're very concerned about the financial well-being of the firms," said Martin Kuperberg, who runs the SEC's New York broker-dealer unit. "We've spoken to a number of people both at the {exchanges} and at the firms." 

Meanwhile, SEC officials in Washington held a series of discussions with officials from the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, the exchanges, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Council of Economic Advisers to see whether market mechanisms were working properly. 

In his first statement since the recent market gyrations began, Richard Breeden, who was sworn in as SEC chairman last week, said the "markets' trading and order routing systems generally operated quite smoothly.
Today's developments demonstrate the value of the significant improvements that have been made in trading systems over the past two years." 

Back offices are the huge, behind-the-scenes operations that support the brokerages' sales and trading departments.
Key back-office functions are to organize and maintain securities owned by a firm and its customers and to monitor the firm's capital position. 

The default of several Wall Street houses that ran short of liquidity during the 1987 crash is a fresh memory for regulators and the exchanges.
So the SEC recently renewed its attacks on firms that violate back-office regulations. 

Two weeks ago, for example, the agency censured Prudential Insurance Co. of America's Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. for failing to adequately keep track of customers' funds.
The move was in part a warning to firms that the SEC will try to crack down on firms if their back offices aren't in order and become a danger in the event of a major market move. "It notifies the broker-dealer community that we won't tolerate this kind of action," Mr. Kuperberg said. 

Separately, the National Association of Securities Dealers dispatched 25 examiners into brokerages' trading rooms to make sure brokers were answering phones and handling customer orders properly.
Two years ago, many market makers refused to answer their phones, creating frustration and losses among investors looking to sell stocks. "The market-making firms responded pretty well," said Joseph Hardiman, Nasdaq president. "We've had little to no complaints." 

