.START 

PepsiCo Inc. 's chairman said he is "more than comfortable with" analysts' estimates that third-quarter earnings rose to at least 98 cents to $1 a share from 91 cents the year earlier. 

D. Wayne Calloway, also chief executive officer of the company, indicated that he expects analysts to raise their forecasts for 1989 after the company releases its earnings today.
So far, analysts have said they are looking for $3.30 to $3.35 a share.
After today's announcement, that range could increase to $3.35 to $3.40 a share.
The official said he also would be comfortable with that new range.
In 1988, the soft-drink giant earned $2.90 a share.
Results for 1989 will include about 40 cents a share from the dilutive effects of snack-food and bottling company acquisitions. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, the company closed yesterday at $57.125 a share, up $3.125. 

The company said third-quarter sales are expected to increase 25% from $3.12 billion of last year's third quarter. 

Domestic soft-drink bottler case sales are estimated to have risen only 1% in the third quarter -- well below the 4% to 5% growth of recent years -- but about in line with the rest of the soft-drink industry. 

Mr. Calloway blamed the slower volume on rainier weather, a dearth of new products in the industry and -- to a much lesser extent -- pricing.
PepsiCo said its soft-drink prices were about 2% higher in the quarter.
Mr. Calloway also noted that soft-drink volume rose a hefty 9% in last year's third quarter, making the comparison more difficult.
International soft-drink volume was up about 6%. 

Snack-food tonnage increased a strong 7% in the third quarter, while domestic profit increased in double digits, Mr. Calloway said.
Excluding the British snack-food business acquired in July, snack-food international tonnage jumped 40%, with sales strong in Spain, Mexico and Brazil.
Total snack-food profit rose 30%. 

Led by Pizza Hut and Taco Bell, restaurant earnings increased about 25% in the third quarter on a 22% sales increase.
Same-store sales for Pizza Hut rose about 13%, while Taco Bell's increased 22%, as the chain continues to benefit from its price-value strategy.
Taco Bell has turned around declining customer counts by permanently lowering the price of its tacos.
Same store-sales for Kentucky Fried Chicken, which has struggled with increased competition in the fast-food chicken market and a lack of new products, rose only 1%. 

The operation, which has been slow to respond to consumers' shifting tastes away from fried foods, has been developing a grilled-chicken product that may be introduced nationally at the end of next year.
The new product has performed well in a market test in Las Vegas, Nev., Mr. Calloway said. 

After a four-year, $7.7 billion acquisition binge that brought a major soft-drink company, soda bottlers, a fast-food chain and an overseas snack-food giant to Pepsi, Mr. Calloway said he doesn't expect any major acquisition in the next year or so.
But, "You never can tell," he added, "you have to take advantage of opportunities." 

