.START 

The White House budget director, prodding Congress to finish work quickly on 1990 budget bills, is trying to put some sting into the little-feared spending cuts that were triggered yesterday under the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law. 

To impose "a little bit more discipline" on the budget process, Budget Director Richard Darman said he won't give agencies much flexibility to shift funds among different programs as a means of coping with the law's requirements. 

Some government budget experts suggested that Mr. Darman's maneuver doesn't amount to much more than tough talk.
Nevertheless, it may add to pressure on the House to follow the Senate's lead and strip from pending budget legislation scores of costly, extraneous provisions. 

House Speaker Thomas Foley met with committee chairmen yesterday to try to move in that direction. "We are going to try to make an agreement with the Senate that the president would sign," the Washington state Democrat told reporters.
The talks are to continue today. 

House Republicans also are reluctant to pare down the 1,878-page measure -- at least until they are guaranteed that the provisions they care about will get another vote. "A lot of the guys . . . don't want it all to just die," said House GOP leader Robert Michel (R., Ill.). 

The House didn't move quickly enough to meet the Gramm-Rudman deadline for passing legislation to bring the projected fiscal 1990 deficit below the $110 billion target.
As the law requires, President Bush yesterday signed an order cutting federal spending across the board by $16.1 billion. 

If removed from the budget legislation, the extraneous provisions in the House bill -- including ones to cut capital-gains taxes, provide new aid for child care and repeal the catastrophic-illness insurance program -- could be reintroduced as separate bills. "What we're trying to explore now is how to protect these other issues," said House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta (D., Calif.). "We're not going to suddenly abandon them." 

Reps.
Foley and Michel had agreed to streamline the deficit-reduction bill before the House even took it up, but Mr. Darman and White House Chief of Staff John Sununu had torpedoed that plan in order to press their fight for a cut in capital-gains taxes. 

Congressional leaders rejected suggestions that their attempts to speed the deficit-reduction bill had anything to do with Friday's stock market decline. "We are responding to our responsibility under the budget act," Rep. Foley said. 

Even before the size of yesterday's rebound in stock prices was known, Mr. Darman said that Friday's plunge "would have no significant effect on the budget process." 

When the fiscal year began on Oct. 1, the Office of Management and Budget began withholding 4.3% of the Pentagon's money and 5.3% of other agencies' money, as the Gramm-Rudman law requires.
Those cuts, known as a "sequester" in budget jargon, became permanent yesterday, although Congress could cancel or rescind them whenever it wants to.
Under a special provision of the law, the government yesterday began slicing 2% from Medicare payments made to doctors and hospitals. 

Nearly two-thirds of all federal spending -- including Social Security payments and salaries of current federal employees -- is exempt from the Gramm-Rudman cuts.
The rest of the government will be pinched, perhaps within a month, if the cut funds aren't restored. 

Taking a tough bargaining position, Mr. Darman said he opposes restoring the funds when Congress finally wraps up its work on 1990 spending.
The Gramm-Rudman penalty won't be taken seriously if agencies merely "figure out how to juggle the accounts, trusting that Congress is going to restore all the money a little bit later," he said. 

Congressional Democrats were quick to disagree.
Senate Budget Chairman James Sasser (D., Tenn.) insisted, "We don't do the American people any good whatsoever by standing by and letting these automatic cuts go into effect." 

To quicken the pain that the spending cuts are intended to inflict, Mr. Darman said the OMB is making the cuts from each individual program, project or activity in the budget.
Until yesterday, OMB had indicated it would cut at the "account" level; each account is comprised of many programs, projects or activities. 

Mr. Darman said the new approach will give agencies "less ability to shift from one area to another . . . to fudge over things." But at least for some major spending programs, government budget experts said, OMB hasn't any significant control of individual programs, projects or activities. 

First to suffer from the spending cuts will be programs that spend most of their money on personnel, Mr. Darman said.
He wouldn't predict how long it would be before the first layoffs, if any, occur.
Under the law, President Bush may exempt military personnel accounts from the spending cuts.
He hasn't yet done so.
Mr. Darman also said yesterday that although the administration isn't any longer pushing to include a cut in capital-gains taxes as part of the 1990 budget legislation, the odds are 8-to-5 in favor of winning approval for capital gains taxes this year. 

