.START 

After two years of drought, it rained money in the stock-index futures markets yesterday. 

As financial markets rebounded, trading volume in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's huge Standard & Poor's 500 stock-index futures pit soared, reaching near-record levels for the first time since October 1987. 

The sudden influx of liquidity enabled several traders to reap six-figure windfalls in a matter of minutes as prices soared, traders said. 

"Guys were minting money in there today," said John Legittino, a futures broker for Elders Futures Inc. in Chicago. 

The S&P 500 futures contract, which moves in fractions of an index point under normal conditions, jumped two to three points in seconds early yesterday after an initial downturn, then moved strongly higher the rest of the day.
Each index point represents a $500 profit for each S&P 500 contract held.
For the first time since the 1987 crash, traders said that they were able to trade several hundred S&P 500 contracts at a time in a highly liquid market. 

Many institutions and individual investors have shied away from stock-index futures, blaming them for speeding the stock market crash on Black Monday two years ago.
Since the crash, many futures traders haven't assumed large positions for fear that the S&P 500 market, with much of its customer order flow missing, would dry up if prices turned against them. 

More than 400 traders jammed the S&P 500 futures pit to await the opening bell.
Traders were shouting bids and offers a full five minutes before the start of trading at 8:30 am 

The contract fell five points at the open to 323.85, the maximum opening move allowed under safeguards adopted by the Merc to stem a market slide.
But several traders quickly stepped up and bid for contracts, driving prices sharply higher.
The market hovered near Friday's closing price of 328.85 for about a half hour, moving several index points higher or lower in seconds, then broke higher and didn't look back. 

The S&P 500 contract that expires in December closed up a record 15.65 points on volume of nearly 80,000 contracts. 

"Traders five feet from each other were making bids and offers that were a full point apart," said one S&P 500 broker. "You could buy at the bid and sell at the offer and make a fortune," he marveled. 

Several of Wall Street's largest securities firms, including Salomon Brothers Inc. and PaineWebber Inc., were also large buyers, traders said.
Salomon Brothers was among the largest sellers of stock-index futures last week, traders said.
Brokerage firms as a rule don't comment on their market activity. 

Unlike the week following Black Monday two years ago, individual traders in the S&P 500 pit were also being uncharacteristically circumspect about their one-day profits. 

"With the FBI around here, bragging rights are a thing of the past," said one trader, referring to the federal investigation of futures trading that so far has resulted in 46 indictments lodged against individuals on the Merc and the Chicago Board of Trade. 

