.START 

National Geographic, the sixth-largest U.S. magazine, is attracting more readers than ever and offers the glossy, high-toned pages that upscale advertisers love. 

So why did advertising pages plunge by almost 10% and ad revenue by 7.2% in the first half? 

To hear advertisers tell it, the magazine just hasn't kept up with the times.
Despite renewed interest by the public in such topics as the environment and the Third World, it hasn't been able to shake its reputation as a magazine boys like to flip through in search of topless tribe women.
Worse, it lagged behind competitors in offering now-standard gimmicks, from regional editions to discounts for frequent advertisers. 

But now, the magazine is attempting to fight back, with an ambitious plan including a revamped sales strategy and a surprisingly aggressive ad campaign.
Advertisers don't think of the magazine first, says Joan McCraw, who joined in April as national advertising director. "What we want to do is take a more aggressive stance.
People didn't believe we were in tune with the marketplace, and in many ways we weren't." 

The 101-year-old magazine has never had to woo advertisers with quite so much fervor before.
It largely rested on its hard-to-fault demographics: 10.8 million subscribers in the first half, up from 10.5 million a year ago; an average age of 42 for readers -- at the height of their consuming years; loyalty to the tune of an 85% average subscription renewal rate. 

The magazine had its best year yet in 1988, when it celebrated its centennial and racked up a 17% gain in ad pages, to 283.
But this year, when the hullabaloo surrounding its centennial died, so too did some advertiser interest.
The reason, ad executives say, is that the entire magazine business has been soft -- and National Geographic has some quirks that make it especially unattractive during a soft market. 

Perhaps the biggest of those factors is its high ad prices -- $130,000 for a four-color page, vs. $47,000 for the Smithsonian, a comparable publication with a far smaller circulation.
When ad dollars are tight, the high page cost is a major deterrent for advertisers, who generally want to appear regularly in a publication or not at all. 

Even though National Geographic offers far more readers than does a magazine like Smithsonian, "the page costs you an arm and a leg to develop any frequency,"says Harry Glass, New York media manager for Bozell Inc. 

To combat that problem, National Geographic, like other magazines, began offering regional editions allowing advertisers to appear in only a portion of its magazines -- for example, ads can run only in the magazines sent to subscribers in the largest 25 markets. 

But the magazine was slower than its competitors to come up with its regional editions, and until last year offered fewer of them than did competitors.
Time magazine, for example, has more than 100 separate editions going to different regions, top management, and other groups. 

Another sticking point for advertisers was National Geographic's tradition of lumping its ads together, usually at the beginning or end of the magazine, rather than spreading ads out among its articles, as most magazines do.
And National Geographic's smaller-than-average size means extra production costs for advertisers. 

But Ms. McCraw says the magazine is fighting back.
It now offers 30 regional editions, it very recently began running ads adjacent to articles, and it has been beefing up its sales force.
And it just launched a promotional campaign to tell chief executives, marketing directors, and media executives just that. 

The centerpiece of the promotion is its new ad campaign, into which the magazine will pour about $500,000, mostly in the next few weeks.
The campaign, created by Omnicom Group's DDB Needham agency, takes advantage of the eye-catching photography that National Geographic is known for.
In one ad, a photo of the interior of the Sainte-Chapelle in Paris is paired with the headline, "The only book more respected than ours doesn't accept advertising." Another ad pictures a tree ant, magnified 80 times, with the headline, "For impact far beyond your size consider our regional editions." 

Ms. McCraw says she wants the campaign to help attract advertisers in 10 categories, including corporate, financial services, consumer electronics, insurance and food.
Her goal: to top 300 ad pages in 1990, up from about 274 this year.
Whether she can meet that ambitious goal is still far from certain. "The ad campaign is meant to contemporize the thought of National Geographic," she says. "We want it to be a '90s kind of image." 

WCRS Plans Ad-Unit Sale 

WCRS Group hopes to announce, perhaps today, an agreement to sell the majority of its ad unit to Paris-based Eurocom, a European ad executive said. 

WCRS has been in discussions with Eurocom for several months.
However, when negotiations bogged down recently, WCRS's chief executive, Peter Scott, met in Paris with another French firm, Boulet Dru Dupuy Petit, or BDDP. 

According to the executive, BDDP's involvement prompted renewed vigor in the WCRS-Eurocom talks and the two agencies were hoping to hammer out details by today.
Executives of the two agencies couldn't be reached last night. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNT: Procter & Gamble Co., Cincinnati, awarded the ad accounts for its line of Professional Crisco vegetable shortening and oil products to Northlich, Stolley, LaWarre, Cincinnati.
Billings weren't disclosed.
Professional Crisco products are specially made for the foodservice industry. 

WHO'S NEWS: Stephen Novick, 49, was named executive vice president, deputy creative director at Grey Advertising, New York.
He was executive vice president, director of broadcast production. 

