.START 

CHICAGO - Options traders were among the big victims of Friday's plunging stock market, including one small firm that required an emergency $50 million bailout. 

While Monday's rebounding markets helped other investors recoup losses, many options customers and professional traders in stock-index options and the options on takeover stocks were left with multimillion-dollar losses, traders here and in New York said. 

Options traders were hurt worse than others on Friday because of the highly volatile nature of options, which often rise or fall in value several times the amount of the price change in the individual stock or index of stocks on which they are based.
Thus, options traders Friday were stuck with losses that also were several times larger than those suffered by many stock traders in New York. 

Jeffrey Miller of Miller Tabak Hirsch & Co. said that given the high degree of leverage in the options market, it is "very easy for these guys to get wiped out.
That may just be the nature of these highly leveraged little creatures." 

An options contract gives the holder the right to buy (call) or sell (put) a specific amount of stock, or in this case the value of a stock index, based on a predetermined price within a given time period.
Options traders who, in return for a small fee, or premium, had previously sold put options on stocks or stock indexes were forced on Friday to buy those contracts back at the previously agreed prices, which were substantially above those in the market as it was falling.
They then had no choice in many cases but to sell the contracts at prevailing prices -- in most cases at a substantial loss. 

The latest round of losses is likely to be a serious blow to the Chicago Board Options Exchange, which has never fully recovered from the aftershock of Black Monday, when investors fled the market because of huge losses. 

Making matters worse was the fact that late Friday afternoon the CBOE halted stock-index options trading in step with the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's halt in stock-index futures.
But while the Merc reopened a half hour later, the CBOE remained closed, leaving many options traders unable to make trades that might have reduced the losses. 

CBOE Chairman Alger "Duke" Chapman, said that, unlike the futures market, the options exchange has to open in a rotation that allows each different options series to trade.
Exchange officials reasoned that they wouldn't have been able to make such a rotation with the time remaining Friday afternoon, and with the stock-index futures on the verge of closing for a second and final time, the CBOE reasoned that its best course was to remain closed. 

The damage was so bad at Fossett Corp., an options trading firm here, that it was forced to transfer its accounts to First Options of Chicago, a unit of Continental Bank Corp., as a result of options trading losses.
Fosset so far is the only member of a financial exchange to be forced to be taken over by another firm as a result of Friday's rout. 

Fossett still had several million dollars in capital left after Friday's close of trading, but not enough that regulators, worried about another potential market plunge yesterday, would let it reopen for trading, options exchange officials said. 

Thus, in an unprecedented arrangement underscoring the seriousness of the transfer, the CBOE, the American Stock Exchange and the Options Clearing Corp., as well as the firm's owner, Stephen Fossett, put up a total of $50 million to guarantee the customer positions being transferred to the bank holding company subsidiary in case the market plunged again yesterday. 

S. Waite Rawls III, vice chairman of Continental Bank, First Options' parent company, said the firm took on about 160 accounts formerly held by Fossett, almost all of them belonging to professional floor traders. 

"Steve and his firm were still worth a lot of money," Mr. Rawls said. "A package of credit support was put together -- including the assets of Steve and his firm." 

The bailout was cobbled together over the weekend, with officials from the Federal Reserve Board, Securities and Exchange Commission, Comptroller of the Currency and Treasury as well as the options exchanges. "It was great to have the luxury of time," Mr. Rawls said. 

At one point, an options industry official had to talk the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's night watchman into giving him the home phone number of Silas Keene, Chicago Fed president. 

First Options didn't have to put any money into the bailout. 

Yesterday's rally in the stock, futures and options markets led CBOE and Amex officials to conclude that the $50 million in guarantees almost certainly won't need to be tapped by First Options. 

The Fossett firm had some losses and liquidity problems during the October 1987 crash as well, Mr. Rawls said. 

A federal official said that Continental Bank worked with securities and banking regulators over the weekend to fashion the Fossett bailout, but that conditions weren't dictated by those agencies. "It was their business decision," the official said. 

Officials at Options Clearing Corp., which processes all options trades for U.S. exchanges, said that the $50 million guarantee was unprecedented, but was necessary to help insure the integrity of the options markets. "It was an extraordinary situation that needed extraordinary steps," said Paul Stevens, OCC president and chief operating officer. 

Mr. Stevens declined to give the specific contributions to the $50 million guarantee from each participant.
But CBOE and Amex officials said that Options Clearing Corp. contributed $20 million to the guarantee, the CBOE put up $8 million, the Amex added $4 million and $18 million came from Mr. Fossett's own assets. 

Mr. Fossett couldn't be reached to comment. 

