.START 

Integrated Resources Inc., the troubled financial-services company that has been trying to sell its core companies to restructure debt, said talks with a potential buyer ended. 

Integrated didn't identify the party or say why the talks failed.
Last week another potential buyer, Whitehall Financial Group -- which had agreed in August to purchase most of Integrated's core companies for $310 million -- ended talks with Integrated. 

Integrated said that it would continue to pursue "other alternatives" to sell the five core companies and that a group of senior executives plans to make a proposal to purchase three of the companies -- Integrated Resources Equity Corp., Resources Trust Co. and Integrated Resources Asset Management Corp.
A price wasn't disclosed. 

Integrated also said it expects to report a second-quarter loss wider than the earlier estimate of about $600 million.
The company didn't disclose the new estimate but said the change was related to Integrated's failure to sell its core businesses, as well as "other events," which it didn't detail, that occurred after its announcement last week that it was in talks with the unidentified prospective buyer. 

Meanwhile, a number of top sales producers from Integrated Resources Equity will meet this afternoon in Chicago to discuss their options.
The unit is a loosely constructed group of about 3,900 independent brokers and financial planners who sell insurance, annuities, limited partnerships, mutual funds and other investments for Integrated and other firms. 

The sales force is viewed as a critical asset in Integrated's attempt to sell its core companies.
Whitehall cited concerns about how long Integrated would be able to hold together the sales force as one reason its talks with Integrated failed. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Integrated closed at $1.25 a share, down 25 cents.
Integrated has been struggling to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing since June, when it failed to make interest payments on nearly $1 billion of debt.
Integrated senior and junior creditors are owed a total of about $1.8 billion. 

