.START 

Many skittish mutual fund investors picked up the phone yesterday, but decided not to cash in their chips after all. 

As the stock market bounced back, withdrawals of money from stock funds amounted to a mere trickle compared with Black Monday, when investors dumped $2.3 billion, or about 2% of stock-fund assets. 

Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest fund company, said phone volume was more than double its typical level, but still half that of Oct. 19, 1987.
Net outflows from Fidelity's stock funds stood at less than $300 million, or below 15% of the $2 billion cash position of the firm's stock portfolios.
Much of the money was switched into the firm's money market funds.
Outflows since the close of trading Friday remain below one-third their level of two years ago, Fidelity said. 

Other mutual fund companies reported even lighter withdrawal requests.
And some investors at Fidelity and elsewhere even began buying stock funds during the day. 

"Two years ago, there was a lot of redemption activity and trouble with people getting through on the phone," said Kathryn McGrath, head of the investment management division of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
This time, "We don't have that at all." 

Of course, the relative calm could be jolted if the market plunges again.
And any strong surge in redemptions could force some funds to dump stocks to raise cash, as some did during Black Monday. 

But funds generally are better prepared this time around.
As a group, their cash position of 10.2% of assets in August -- the latest figure available -- is 14% higher than two years earlier.
Many fund managers have boosted their cash levels in recent weeks. 

The biggest flurry of investor activity came early in the day.
Vanguard Group Inc. saw heavy exchanges from stock funds into money market funds after the telephone lines opened at 8:30 a.m. "In the first hour, the real nervous folks came along," a spokesman said. "But the horrendous pace of call volume in the first half-hour slowed considerably." 

At Scudder, Stevens & Clark Inc., phone calls came in at 40% more than the normal pace through early afternoon.
Most of that increase came in the first hour after the phone lines opened at 8 a.m. 

As stocks rose, in fact, some investors changed course and reversed their sell orders.
Many funds allow investors to void orders before the close of trading. 

At Scudder and at the smaller Ivy funds group in Hingham, Mass., for instance, some shareholders called early in the morning to switch money from stock funds to money market funds, but later called back to reverse the switches.
Because mutual fund trades don't take effect until the market close -- in this case, at 4 p.m. -- these shareholders effectively stayed put. 

At Fidelity's office in downtown Boston, Gerald Sherman walked in shortly after 7:30 a.m. and placed an order to switch his retirement accounts out of three stock funds and into a money market fund.
But by 3:15 p.m., with the market comfortably ahead for the day, Mr. Sherman was preparing to undo his switch. 

"It's a nice feeling to know that things stabilized," said Mr. Sherman, the 51-year-old co-owner of a discount department store. 

But some investors continued to switch out of high-risk, high-yield junk funds despite yesterday's rebound from that market's recent price declines. 

Shareholders have been steadily bailing out of several big junk funds the past several weeks as the $200 billion market was jolted by a cash crunch at Campeau Corp. and steadily declining prices.
Much of the money has been switched into money market funds, fund executives say. 

Instead of selling bonds to meet redemptions, however, some funds have borrowed from banks to meet withdrawal requests.
This avoids knocking down prices further.
The $1.1 billion T. Rowe Price High Yield Fund was among the funds that borrowed during the Campeau crisis, says George J. Collins, president of T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. 

That way, Mr. Collins says, "We didn't have to sell securities in a sloppy market." When the market stabilized, he added, the firm sold the bonds and quickly paid the loans back. 

Tom Herman contributed to this article. 

