.START 

Being the No. 2 newspaper in town just got tougher. 

The Dallas Morning News, the No. 1 paper in town, has secured exclusive rights here to Universal Press Syndicate's features, including 26 previously carried by its struggling rival, the Dallas Times Herald.
The News agreed to pay a minimum of $100,000 annually for five years for the features, and an unusual $500,000 fee, mostly up front, to keep all current and future Universal offerings for itself in the Dallas area. 

The move was a stunning coup, nabbing some of the Times Herald's biggest draws, including "Dear Abby," "Doonesbury," Erma Bombeck's column and "The Far Side." It also reignited a long-running newspaper war that had cooled last year after closely held DTH Media Inc. bought the Times Herald. 

Universal argues that special circumstances led to the agreement.
But if the syndicate's contract with the Morning News survives the Times Herald's court challenge, other second-place newspapers worry that they, too, may see their best features snatched away by bigger, wealthier rivals. 

"We're very concerned," says Tom King, the editor and president of the El Paso Herald-Post, a Scripps Howard newspaper that competes with a Gannett Corp. paper. "It certainly looks like it could lead to bidding wars." 

One effect, syndicate executives say, is that some newspapers in competing markets are considering seeking long-term contracts for their favorite features instead of the usual pacts that let the syndicate cancel with 30 to 90 days' notice. 

For smaller newspapers, syndicated features can be crucial.
Industry executives say the columns and cartoons give newspapers consistency and build fierce reader loyalty. "I have people tell me that Garfield is the only reason they read the {Arkansas} Gazette," says Walter E. Hussman, the publisher of the competing Arkansas Democrat.
Syndicates have traditionally turned down fatter fees from competitors, switching only when a newspaper dropped a feature or some unusual ownership change occurred.
In 1984, the Boston Herald stole about 10 features from the bigger Boston Globe, but only after the Herald's owner, Rupert Murdoch, bought the features' syndicator.
In 1977, Universal pulled its features from the now-defunct Philadelphia Bulletin because of a contract dispute and because "there was no growth {there} for Universal," says John McMeel, president and co-owner of Universal. 

Growth was also a consideration in Dallas.
The Times Herald's circulation had been slipping for several years, and its audited daily circulation now stands at 222,000, compared with the Morning News's 370,000.
But the main reason for the move, Mr. McMeel says, is a joint venture between Universal and A.H. Belo Corp., the Morning News's parent and the owner of five television stations.
Plans call for the two to explore TV programming drawn from the syndicate's and others' characters, as well as to develop TV ads for newspapers using Universal's characters. 

Universal says that it wanted all its creators to share in the television venture and Belo wouldn't promote features appearing in its competition.
Belo declined comment, citing the litigation. 

The Times Herald charges that the venture is a smokescreen, created to hide the News's plan to buy the features away. "We're very skeptical of a venture in which no one has invested a dollar, in which no one has any experience in syndicating animated features and game shows and for which there was not prior {market} research," says Roy E. Bode, the Times Herald's editor. 

Some syndicate executives apparently prefer not to discuss the episode in public.
Willard Colston, chairman of the Los Angeles Times Syndicate and program director of the National Features Council, wanted the group to sponsor a panel discussion on the pact at its annual meeting in Dallas last week.
Initially a majority of the directors, made up of syndicate executives, editors, cartoonists and columnists, supported the idea.
But Universal's Mr. McMeel, the council's president, asked directors to reconsider, and they voted down the discussion 13-12, Mr. Colston says. 

Meanwhile, the Times Herald is just hoping to survive this latest blow.
A Houston state district judge refused to enjoin the syndicate from moving the features, and the Morning News began running most of them a few weeks ago.
A trial on breach of contract and antitrust charges isn't expected for a few months.
Mr. Bode acknowledges that some subscriptions have been canceled. 

The Universal-Morning News deal also troubles syndicated writers and artists, who fear that they won't get their cut from this new type of exclusivity payment. (Creators of syndicated features generally receive about half the fee a newspaper pays for their work.) Mr. McMeel says some of the exclusivity payment fee will be used for future development of features and promises that those whose work appears in the Morning News will see "substantial immediate increases" in pay.
But he concedes that they haven't been notified yet.
The uncertainty already has some in the business plotting new strategy.
Arnold Schwartzman, a Dayton, Ohio, lawyer who has represented about 50 writers and artists, says that any new contract or renewal he negotiates will require that special payments be shared with his clients. 

"It's not something I'm considering; it'll become part of my boilerplate," he says. 

