.START 

AN EARTHQUAKE STRUCK Northern California, killing more than 50 people. 

The violent temblor, which lasted about 15 seconds and registered 6.9 on the Richter scale, also caused the collapse of a 30-foot section of the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge and shook Candlestick Park.
The tremor was centered near Hollister, southeast of San Francisco, and was felt as far as 200 miles away.
Numerous injuries were reported.
Some buildings collapsed, gas and water lines ruptured and fires raged.
The quake, which also caused damage in San Jose and Berkeley, knocked out electricity and telephones, cracked roadways and disrupted subway service in the Bay Area. 

Major injuries weren't reported at Candlestick Park, where the third game of baseball's World Series was canceled and fans evacuated from the stadium. 

Bush vowed to veto a bill allowing federal financing for abortions in cases of rape and incest, saying tax dollars shouldn't be used to "compound a violent act with the taking of an unborn life." His pledge, in a letter to Democratic Sen. Byrd, came ahead of an expected Senate vote on spending legislation containing the provision. 

East Germany's Politburo met amid speculation that the ruling body would oust hard-line leader Honecker, whose rule has been challenged by mass emigration and calls for democratic freedoms.
Meanwhile, about 125 refugees flew to Duesseldorf, West Germany, from Warsaw, the first airlift in East Germany's refugee exodus. 

The World Psychiatric Association voted at an Athens parley to conditionally readmit the Soviet Union.
Moscow, which left the group in 1983 to avoid explusion over allegations that political dissidents were being certified as insane, could be suspended if the misuse of psychiatry against dissenters is discovered during a review within a year. 

NASA postponed the liftoff of the space shuttle Atlantis because of rain near the site of the launch pad in Cape Canaveral, Fla.
The flight was rescheduled for today.
The spacecraft's five astronauts are to dispatch the nuclear-powered Galileo space probe on an exploratory mission to Jupiter. 

Senate Democratic leaders said they had enough votes to defeat a proposed constitutional amendment to ban flag burning.
The amendment is aimed at skirting a Supreme Court ruling that threw out the conviction of a Texas flag-burner on grounds that his freedom of speech was violated. 

Federal researchers said lung-cancer mortality rates for people under 45 years of age have begun to decline, particularly for white males.
The National Cancer Institute also projected that overall U.S. mortality rates from lung cancer should begin to drop in several years if cigarette smoking continues to abate. 

Bush met with South Korean President Roh, who indicated that Seoul plans to further ease trade rules to ensure that its economy becomes as open as the other industrialized nations by the mid-1990s.
Bush assured Roh that the U.S. would stand by its security commitments "as long as there is a threat" from Communist North Korea. 

The Bush administration is seeking an understanding with Congress to ease restrictions on U.S. involvement in foreign coups that might result in the death of a country's leader.
A White House spokesman said that while Bush wouldn't alter a longstanding ban on such involvement, "there's a clarification needed" on its interpretation. 

India's Gandhi called for parliamentary elections next month.
The balloting, considered a test for the prime minister and the ruling Congress (I) Party, comes amid charges of inept leadership and government corruption.
Gandhi's family has ruled independent India for all but five years of its 42-year history. 

The Soviet Union abstained from a U.N. General Assembly vote to reject Israel's credentials.
It was the first time in seven years that Moscow hasn't joined efforts, led by Moslem nations, to expel Israel from the world body, and was viewed as a sign of improving Soviet-Israeli ties.
Israel was seated by a vote of 95-37, with 15 abstentions. 

Black activist Walter Sisulu said the African National Congress wouldn't reject violence as a way to pressure the South African government into concessions that might lead to negotiations over apartheid.
The 77-year-old Sisulu was among eight black political activists freed Sunday from prison. 

London has concluded that Austrian President Waldheim wasn't responsible for the execution of six British commandos in World War II, although he probably was aware of the slayings.
The report by the Defense Ministry also rejected allegations that Britain covered up evidence of Waldheim's activities as a German army officer. 

An international group approved a formal ban on ivory trade despite objections from southern African governments, which threatened to find alternative channels for selling elephant tusks.
The move by the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species, meeting in Switzerland, places the elephant on the endangered-species list. 

An assassin in Colombia killed a federal judge on a Medellin street.
An anonymous caller to a local radio station said cocaine traffickers had slain the magistrate in retaliation for the extraditions of Colombians wanted on drug charges in the U.S. 

Libyan leader Gadhafi met with Egypt's President Mubarak, and the two officials pledged to respect each other's laws, security and stability.
They stopped short of resuming diplomatic ties, severed in 1979.
The reconciliation talks in the Libyan desert town of Tobruk followed a meeting Monday in the Egyptian resort of Mersa Metruh. 

