.START 

The bulls are back in the art-auction china shops, predicting higher prices and higher volume than ever before.
Christie's and Sotheby's, the two major New York houses, are about to offer a large number of impressionist and modern paintings at estimates unheard of even five years ago.
They are betting that demand for these pictures will be so strong that the market will swallow everything that is thrown at it and prices still will rise -- a lot.
As art dealer Richard Feigen sees it, "There is unlimited money trying to absorb itself in art." 

Step right this way.
More than $600 million of impressionist and modern paintings are about to hit the New York auction block -- far outstripping May's four-day $400 million bonanza.
This season Lorinda de Roulet (sister of John Whitney Payson, for whom "Irises" by Vincent van Gogh was sold for $53.9 million in November of 1987, to the Australian Alan Bond, who still hasn't taken possession because he hasn't yet paid off the loan Sotheby's offered him at the sale) has consigned another biggie to Sotheby's. "Au Lapin Agile" is a 1905 Rose Period Picasso being billed as "the most important 20th-century picture ever to come up for auction." It may sell for more than any previous Picasso -- the record is $47.85 million set in May for "Self Portrait: Yo Picasso." 

Sotheby's also weighs in with the John T. Dorrance Jr. collection of impressionists at an estimated $100 million-plus (to be offered tomorrow) and a juicy assortment of paintings from other sources, more than 35 of which are expected to sell in November for at least $1 million each. 

Christie's has snagged the 15 impressionist and modern paintings being pruned from Paul Mellon's vast collection, including the probable $30 million-plus "Rue Mosnier, Paris, Decorated With Flags on June 30, 1878" by Edouard Manet (purchased by Mellon at the Jacob Goldschmidt sale in London in 1958 for $316,400) and a van Gogh, "Trunk of an Old Yew Tree, Arles," estimated at $25 million-plus. 

Other one-owner collections include Billy Wilder's more modest but choice offerings, and the George N. Richard collection -- piled on top of Christie's estimated $150 million -- $200 million of other impressionist goodies.
All these will go under the hammer on Nov. 13 and 14. 

"A strong art market is bringing out paintings I never expected to see on the market," says David Nash, director of Sotheby's Fine Arts Division.
Some museum directors never expected to see them there either.
But since the 1986 tax laws drastically reduced deductions for the donation of appreciated property and reduced overall tax rates (thereby making deductions less significant), charitable donations to museums, when anyone makes them, are very charitable indeed.
And given the seductive prices held out by the auction houses, the urge to sell can -- and apparently has -- become irresistible. 

Of the current group of paintings, it's hard to say which, in the days before tax reform, might have been donated instead of sold.
No museum director will risk offending potential patrons by publicly airing disappointed hopes.
Philadelphia Museum head Anne d'Harnoncourt insists that even though John Dorrance may have been the chairman of her Board of Trustees, "We weren't expecting the pictures we didn't get." 

Although Sotheby's points out that it is "an international organization" not specifically concerned with potential losses to American museums, others are up in arms: "Donations have always been the main source of increased museum collections," says Edward H. Able Jr., executive director of the American Association of Museums. "Now there is a hemorrhaging of this country's patrimony." According to a study conducted by the Association of Art Museum Directors, the drop in the dollar value of donated works of art since 1986 is more than 50%. "This is just the tip of the iceberg, because no major collector has died recently," says Christopher Burge, president of Christie's America. "The next 10 years are going to be a wasteland for American museums." 

But not for auction houses.
Their sales have turned into theater for a world audience.
Even before the sales, the hoopla is well under way.
Major attractions have out-of-town tryouts. "Au Lapin Agile," some of the Mellon paintings, and others went around the world on a series of whistle-stop exhibition tours; Billy Wilder's pictures went to a party at the Beverly Hills Hotel; and the Dorrance paintings hung for five days in the Philadelphia Museum of Art. (Even Sotheby's PR department couldn't have pulled that one off; Dorrance's executors "requested" it.) 

At last, however, the warmup is done and the action is about to begin.
And it will soon be clear whether enough people will be raising those little bidding paddles, no matter what the cost.
The weak dollar makes our market a playground for foreign bidders, and our sorry balance of trade has given them plenty of dollars to play with. "In many ways the Japanese -- particularly Japanese corporations -- dictate art price levels," says Susan Seidel of William Beadleston, a New York private dealing concern. "They are willing to pay almost anything." 

But why art?
Are we talking pure aesthetic appreciation here?
For many buyers, that still is major motivation.
But the stakes are now very high and for your $40 million you can buy only the best of what is available -- which may not be the best there is.
But at least the auction process illustrates so beautifully that everybody else wanted to have it too.
For some, the social status that can be acquired in this way is the point of the game. "They buy the co-op, they buy the cars," says Ms. Seidel. "Then they buy `brand names' like Picasso to put on the wall." 

But at these price levels, confidence in the "investment" potential of major paintings must be playing a part in fueling the collecting frenzy.
Big-bucks buyers trust that the market will continue its strong surge. "In October of '87 people saw that everything else went down but art went up," Desmond Corcoran of London's Alex Reid & Lefevre Ltd. gallery points out.
Since then, the market has continued to rise, but now the size of the estimates seems to be making some people nervous. "Zey are crazee!" shrieked one French dealer, reeling from auction estimate sticker shock. 

In a lower key, Mr. Corcoran finds the world "full of strange speculators" and the auction estimates "incredible," and suggests the Dorrance sale as a sort of early warning system: "These pictures are not absolutely top quality," he says. "So if the market absorbs those, what comes three weeks later will do just fine." 

If all goes well, if the Picasso hits $75 million, and Mellon, Dorrance, Wilder and the rest get what they bargained for, the uncomfortable, questioning buzz in the art marketplace will trail off into sighs of relief, only to begin anew slightly louder than before, as the cycle starts over in the spring.
Because for some, the art market has become a sort of magic beanstalk rising into the clouds at a cartoon rate of speed.
Nobody knows what is at the top, but they are hoping it is very far away. 

Ms. Berman covers the auction scene. 

