.START 

It never ceases to amaze me how the business world continues to trivialize the world's environmental problems ("Is Science, or Private Gain, Driving Ozone Policy?" by George Melloan, Business World, Oct. 24).
To suggest that a 10% drop in ozone by the middle of the next century would be negligible is irresponsible and shortsighted.
Consider the fact that a mere 2% drop in ozone would increase birth defects and mutations by allowing solar radiation to alter the DNA structure.
Even a small reduction is unacceptable and to suggest otherwise is penny-wise and pound-foolish. 

The reason environmentalists "don't mind seeing new crises arise" is because there are new crises.
Crises larger and more dangerous to the quality of life than they were 10 years ago.
If you are doubtful, consider for a moment that the Pomton Lakes Reservoirs in northern New Jersey, which supply the tristate area with drinking water, are riddled with toxic PCBs.
This is a fact and not the product of some environmental doomsayer or a group's ploy to create a market. 

It's time business leaders and the general public learn that mankind does not rule over this natural environment but is rather the integral, symbiotic player within nature's workings. 

Mark T. Kuiper 

Jersey City, N.J. 

Mr. Melloan's column was right on the money, but I wish it could have gone one step further.
As an employee of a major refrigerator and freezer manufacturer, I have been heavily involved in dealing with the political manifestations of the Rowland-Molina theory (named after the researchers who found in 1974 that chlorofluorocarbons contributed to the depletion of ozone in the earth's atmosphere) and the Montreal Protocol.
An important part of my effort has been to understand the science so I can explain it to corporate colleagues facing major changes in product design. 

In my research, I have found a paper by Joseph Scotto of the National Cancer Institute and several colleagues reporting an 11-year decrease in UV-B radiation at eight U.S. measurement sites. 

Our concern for the ozone layer, of course, grows out of the potential for increasing UV-B radiation, which could damage flora and fauna.
The last of the measurements reported was in 1985, but recent conversations with Mr. Scotto indicated that he knew of no recent changes in the trend.
I understand, but haven't yet verified, that there are studies by Norwegians, Russians and the Max Planck Institute that show either unchanging or declining UV-B at the surface. 

To me, this calls into question the validity of the Rowland-Molina theory and hence the whole chlorofluorocarbons replacement effort.
This, in turn, threatens the massive vested interests of which you have written.
My questions on this subject at a recent meeting at the World Resources Institute with representatives of the National Resource Development Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, Friends of the Earth, etc. were greeted with derision and some mumbled comments about that report being discredited.
When I expressed amazement that no one was undertaking a more current and credible UV-B study, I was urged to get back to the agenda topic, which was, ironically, a schedule for getting rid of HCFCs, the so-called soft CFCs that are such an important part of the CFC substitution scenario. 

Subsequently, I have learned that a private group, of which Du Pont is a part, is funding a modest program to continue data gathering at the Scotto report stations as well as to develop more sophisticated UVB measuring instruments.
But this is almost an underground activity.
To my knowledge, no government entities, including the EPA, are pursuing UV-B measurements.
The topic never comes up in ozonedepletion "establishment" meetings, of which I have attended many. 

It seems to me that such measurements are a vital part of any intellectually honest evaluation of the threat posed by CFCs.
While recognizing that professional environmentalists may feel threatened, I intend to urge that UV-B be monitored whenever I can. 

Frederick H. Hallett 

Vice President 

Industry and Government Relations 

White Consolidated Industries Inc. 

Washington 

The relationship between surface release of CFCs and global stratospheric ozone loss was identified back in 1974.
Although, like all scientific theories, it had its initial opponents, few experts question the connection now.
The discovery of the ozone "hole" over Antarctica and the results of ground-based and high-altitude aircraft experiments conducted over the past several years serve as evidence that ozone depletion is related to CFC concentrations. 

In the September issue of Scientific American, Thomas E. Graedel, distinguished member of the technical staff at AT&T Bell Laboratories, and Paul J. Crutzen, director of the air chemistry division of the Max Planck Institute for Chemistry in Mainz, West Germany, wrote, "It is now quite evident that chlorofluorocarbons, particularly CFC-11 and CFC-12 are the major culprits responsible for ozone depletion." Mr. Melloan quotes Peter Teagan and invokes the name of Arthur D. Little Inc. to support his statement.
However, unlike Messrs. Graedel and Crutzen, who are both pioneers in the study of atmospheric chemistry, Mr. Teagan has no special expertise in the area.
He is a mechanical engineer, not an atmospheric chemist. 

It is insulting and demeaning to say that scientists "needed new crises to generate new grants and contracts" and that environmental groups need them to stay in business.
Solving the global environmental problems we all face will require an unprecedented level of cooperation and communication among industry, policy makers and the scientific community world-wide. 

Karen Fine Coburn 

Publisher 

Global Environmental Change Report 

Arlington, Mass. 

