.START 

Santa Fe Pacific was the kind of story Wall Street loved. 

Since the value of its assets wasn't known, analysts were free to pick a number.
In one of many rosy scenarios, Bear Stearns's Gary Schneider wrote in March that its real estate alone had a value of $4.5 billion.
Throw in its railroad, minerals, pipeline and oil assets, he and others argued, and the Chicago-based conglomerate should be worth 30 a share. 

And why should holders expect to realize that presumed "worth?" That was another reason the Street loved Santa Fe.
With real estate experts Olympia & York and Samuel Zell's Itel owning close to 40% of Santa Fe's stock, management was under pressure -- in a favored phrase of Wall Street -- to quickly "maximize values." 

But value, it turns out, is only what a buyer will pay.
And with the company's recent announcement that it is contemplating a partial sale of its real estate, the values suddenly look poorer. 

Santa Fe has disclosed that it is negotiating to sell a 20% interest in its real estate unit to the California Public Employees Retirement System for roughly $400 million.
Since the real estate unit also includes debt, the imputed value of the real estate itself is close to $3 billion. 

"The implied current net asset value of 22.70 {per share} is well below the 30 level that the Street believed," PaineWebber says. "The upside was in the intangible real estate . . . which is no longer an intangible." 

So what is Santa Fe worth? 

If the railroad is valued on a private market basis -- at the same multiple of earnings as in the recent sale of CNW -- it would have a value of $1.65 billion.
A compromise between bulls and bears puts remaining assets and cash -- including its 44% stake in its publicly traded pipeline -- at $2 billion.
Santa Fe also has $3.7 billion in debt.
In addition, its railroad lost a $750 million antitrust suit, which is on appeal, and which analysts say could be settled for one-third that amount. 

That nets out to about $17 a share for the company on a private market basis.
But Santa Fe, currently trading at 18 7/8, isn't likely to realize private market values by selling assets, because the tax against it would be onerous.
Its plan, instead, is to spin off the remainder of its real estate unit and to possibly do the same with its mining and energy assets. 

Robert D. Krebs, Santa Fe's chairman, argues that since its businesses are valued in different ways, "the sum of the parts may be greater than the whole." 

But it isn't clear why that should be so.
The spinoff argument, after all, reverses the current notion that assets are worth more to private buyers than to public shareholders.
And real estate usually hasn't traded well under public ownership. 

Salomon Brothers says, "We believe the real estate properties would trade at a discount . . . after the realty unit is spun off. . . . And what about the cost, and risk, of waiting to realize the hypothetical private market values?" 

Some analysts remain bullish.
Mr. Schneider of Bear Stearns says he is recalculating the worth of the company's assets and, in the meantime, is sticking to his "buy" recommendation on the belief that he will find "values" of 30 a share.
He adds: "If for any reason I don't have the values, then I won't recommend it." 

First Boston's Graeme Anne Lidgerwood values Santa Fe at 24, down from her earlier estimate of 29.
Her recent report classifies the stock as a "hold." But it appears to be the sort of hold one makes while heading for the door. 

Quoting from the report: "The stock's narrow discount to asset valuation makes it a relatively unappealing investment at current prices, especially given the risk that our projections could be on the aggressive side." 

Chairman Krebs says the California pension fund is getting a bargain price that wouldn't have been offered to others.
In other words: The real estate has a higher value than the pending deal suggests.
Since most of the unit's real estate is in California, the pension fund will be a useful political ally in a state where development is often held hostage to zoning boards.
And, as Mr. Zell says, with Itel and O&Y on the unit's board, the real estate will be run by "a very unusual group" to say the least. 

It is possible then that Santa Fe's real estate -- even in a state imperiled by earthquakes -- could, one day, fetch a king's ransom.
But as Drexel analyst Linda Dunn notes, its properties will be developed over 15 to 20 years.
So despite Wall Street's rosy talk of quickly "maximizing values," holders could be in for a long wait. 

Santa Fe Pacific 

(NYSE; Symbol: SFX) 

Business: Railroad, natural resources and real estate 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Revenue: $3.14 billion 

Net loss: $46.5 million; 30 cents a share 

Third quarter, Sept. 30, 1989: 

Net income: 21 cents a share vs. net loss of $4.11 a share 

Average daily trading volume: 

344,354 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 157.4 million 

