.START 

If you think you have stress-related problems on the job, there's good news and bad news.
You're probably right, and you aren't alone. 

A new Gallup Poll study commissioned by the New York Business Group on Health, found that a full 25% of the work force at companies may suffer from anxiety disorders or a stress-related illness, with about 13% suffering from depression. 

The study surveyed a national group of medical directors, personnel managers and employee assistance program directors about their perceptions of these problems in their companies.
It is one of a series of studies on health commissioned by the New York Business Group, a non-profit organization with about 300 members.
The stress study was undertaken because problems related to stress "are much more prevalent than they seem," said Leon J. Warshaw, executive director of the business group. 

In presenting the study late last week, Dr. Warshaw estimated the cost of these types of disorders to business is substantial.
Occupational disability related to anxiety, depression and stress costs about $8,000 a case in terms of worker's compensation.
In terms of days lost on the job, the study estimated that each affected employee loses about 16 work days a year because of stress, anxiety or depression. 

He added that the cost for stress-related compensation claims is about twice the average for all injury claims. 

"We hope to sensitize employers" to recognize the problems so they can do something about them, Dr. Warshaw said.
Early intervention into these types of problems can apparently save businesses long-term expense associated with hospitalization, which sometimes results when these problems go untreated for too long. 

Even the courts are beginning to recognize the link between jobs and stress-related disorders in compensation cases, according to a survey by the National Council on Compensation Insurance. 

But although 56% of the respondents in the study indicated that mental-health problems were fairly pervasive in the workplace, there is still a social stigma associated with people seeking help. 

The disorders, which 20 years ago struck middle-age and older people, "now strike people at the height of productivity," says Robert M.A. Hirschfeld, of the National Institute of Mental Health, who spoke at the presentation of the study's findings. 

The poll showed that company size had a bearing on a manager's view of the problem, with 65% of those in companies of more than 15,000 employees saying stress-related problems were "fairly pervasive" and 55% of those in companies with fewer than 4,000 employees agreeing. 

The poll also noted fear of a takeover as a stress-producing event in larger companies.
More than eight in 10 respondents reported such a stress-provoking situation in their company.
Mid-sized companies were most affected by talk of layoffs or plant closings. 

The study, which received funding from Upjohn Co., which makes several drugs to treat stress-related illnesses, also found 47% of the managers said stress, anxiety and depression contribute to decreased production.
Alcohol and substance abuse as a result of stress-related problems was cited by 30% of those polled. 

Although Dr. Warshaw points out that stress and anxiety have their positive uses, "stress perceived to be threatening implies a component of fear and anxiety that may contribute to burnout." He also noted that various work environments, such as night work, have their own "stressors." 

"We all like stress, but there's a limit," says Paul D'Arcy, of Rohrer, Hibler & Replogle, a corporate psychology and management consulting firm.
The problem, says Mr. D'Arcy, a psychologist, is that "it's very hard to get any hard measures on how stress affects job performance." 

