.START 

When Rune Andersson set out to revive flagging Swedish conglomerate Trelleborg AB in the early 1980s, he spurned the advice of trendy management consultants. 

"All these consultants kept coming around telling us we should concentrate on high technology, electronics or biotechnology, and get out of mature basic industries," Mr. Andersson recalls.
Yet under its 45-year-old president, Trelleborg moved aggressively into those unfashionable base industries -- first strengthening its existing rubber and plastics division, later adding mining as well as building and construction materials. 

It was a gutsy move for a little-known executive, fired after only two months as president of his previous company.
But going against the grain has never bothered Mr. Andersson.
Stroking his trademark white goatee during a recent interview, the diminutive Swede quips: "It turned out to be lucky for us.
If the whole market thinks what you're doing is crazy you don't have much competition." 

Mr. Andersson is anxious to strengthen Trelleborg's balance sheet.
Characteristically, he didn't waste much time getting started. 

On Tuesday, Trelleborg's directors announced plans to spin off two big divisions -- minerals processing, and building and distribution -- as separately quoted companies on Stockholm's Stock Exchange.
At current market prices, the twin public offerings to be completed next year would add an estimated 2.5 billion Swedish kronor ($386 million) to Trelleborg's coffers, analysts say. 

The board had also been expected to approve a SKr1.5 billion international offering of new Trelleborg shares.
But that share issue -- intended to make Trelleborg better known among international investors -- was postponed until market conditions stabilize, people familiar with the situation say. 

Trelleborg's internationally traded "Bfree" series stock plunged SKr29 ($4.48) to SKr205 ($31.65) in volatile trading Monday in Stockholm.
Tuesday, the shares regained SKr20, closing at SKr225. 

Mr. Andersson says he is confident that taking parts of the company public will help erase the "conglomerate stigma" that has held down Trelleborg's share price.
Trelleborg plans to remain the dominant shareholder with stakes of slightly less than 50% of both units. 

The spinoff should solve a problem for the parent.
A family foundation set up by late founder Henry Dunker controls 59% of Trelleborg's voting shares outstanding.
But the foundation bylaws require the entire Trelleborg stake to be sold in the open market if control drops below 50%. 

That possibility had crept closer as repeated new share offerings to finance Trelleborg's rapid growth steadily diluted the foundation's holding.
That growth is the result of Mr. Andersson's shopping spree, during which he has bought and sold more than 100 companies during the past five years. 

Most of the new additions were barely profitable, if not outright loss makers.
Applying prowess gained during earlier stints at appliance maker AB Electrolux, Mr. Andersson and a handful of loyal lieutenants aggressively stripped away dead wood -- and got quick results. 

The treatment turned Trelleborg into one of Scandinavia's biggest and fastest-growing industrial concerns.
Between 1985 and 1988, sales multipled more than 10 times and pretax profit surged almost twelvefold. 

Many analysts expect Mr. Andersson, who owns 1.7% of the company, to be named Trelleborg's new chairman when Ernst Herslow steps down next year.
But the promotion isn't likely to alter a management style Mr. Andersson describes as "being the driving force leading the troops, not managing by sitting back with a cigar waiting for people to bring me ideas." 

Last month, in his boldest move yet, Mr. Andersson and Trelleborg joined forces with Canada's Noranda Inc. in a joint $2 billion hostile takeover of another big Canadian mining concern, Falconbridge Ltd. Industry analysts suggest that the conquest of Falconbridge could vault Trelleborg from a regional Scandinavian success story to a world-class mining concern. 

"Trelleborg isn't in the same league yet as mining giants such as RTZ Corp. or Anglo-American Corp.," says Mike Kurtanjek, a mining analyst at James Capel & Co., London. "But we certainly like what we've seen so far." 

But Trelleborg still must clear some tough hurdles.
Mr. Andersson acknowledges that the company's mining division "will be busy for a while digesting its recent expansion." 

Booming metals prices have fueled Trelleborg's recent profit surge, raising mining's share of pretax profit to 68% this year from a big loss two years earlier.
But analysts caution an expected fall in metal prices next year could slow profit growth. 

Mining is likely to remain Trelleborg's main business.
Analysts say its chances of success will likely hinge on how well Trelleborg manages to cooperate with Noranda in the Falconbridge venture. 

Noranda and Trelleborg each came close to winning Falconbridge alone before the successful joint bid.
Some analysts say Noranda would prefer to break up Falconbridge, and that the Swedes -- relatively inexperienced in international mining operations -- could have problems holding their own with a much bigger partner like Noranda operating on its home turf. 

Mr. Andersson insists that Trelleborg and Noranda haven't discussed a Falconbridge break-up.
Falconbridge, he says, will continue operating in its current form. 

"We'd be reluctant to accept 50-50 ownership in a manufacturing company.
But such partnerships are common in mining, where there aren't problems or conflict of interest or risk of cheating by a partner," Trelleborg's president says. 

Perhaps more important, both companies share Mr. Andersson's belief in the coming renaissance of base industries. 

"If the 1980s were a decade of consumption, the '90s will be the investment decade," Mr. Andersson says. 

"The whole of Europe and the industrialized world is suffering from a breakdown in infrastructure investment," he says. "That's beginning to change.
And investment is the key word for base metals, and most other businesses Trelleborg is in." 

