.START 

ONCE YOU MAKE UP your mind about an investment, the rest is easy, right?
You just call your broker and say "buy" or "sell." 

Dream on.
There are all sorts of ways to give buy and sell instructions to a broker -- and just as many ways to get burned if you don't know what you're doing. 

So here's a rundown of the most common types of market orders permitted by the stock and commodity exchanges.
Two things to keep in mind: Not all exchanges accept every type of order.
And even when a specific order is acceptable to an exchange, a brokerage firm can refuse to enter it for a customer. 

Market Order: This is probably the most widely used order -- and the one most open to abuse by unscrupulous floor brokers, since it imposes no price restrictions.
With a market order, an investor tells a broker to buy or sell "at the market." It's like saying, "get me in now" or "get me out now." For example, if wheat is being offered at $4.065 and bid at $4.060, a market order to buy would be filled at the higher price and a market order to sell at the lower price.
A recent indictment alleges that some floor brokers at the two largest Chicago commodity exchanges used market orders to fill customers' orders at unfavorable prices by arranging trades with fellow brokers.
Profits realized from these trades would then be shared by the conspiring brokers. 

Limit Order: Limit orders are used when investors want to restrict the amount they will receive or pay for an investment.
Investors do this by specifying a minimum price at which the investment may be sold or the maximum price that may be paid for it.
Suppose an investor wants to sell a stock, but not for less than $55.
A limit order to sell could be entered at that price.
One risk: Investors may regret the restriction if the stock reaches 54 and then falls. 

Unless the market goes at least one tick (the smallest price increment permitted) beyond the limit price, investors aren't assured of having their orders filled because there may not be sufficient trading volume to permit filling it at the specified price. 

Stop Order: Stop orders tell a floor broker to buy or sell an investment once the price reaches a certain level.
Once the price reaches that level, a stop order turns into a market order, and the order is filled at whatever price the broker can get.
Stop orders are sometimes called "stop-loss" orders because they are frequently used to protect profits or limit losses. 

While stop orders sound similar to limit orders, there is a difference: Sell stops must be entered at a price below the current market price and buy stops above.
In contrast, sell limit orders must be placed above the market price and buy limit orders are placed below. 

The crash in October 1987 and last Friday's sell-off painfully taught some investors exactly what stop orders will and won't do.
An investor who may have placed a stop-loss order at $90 under a stock that was trading at $100 a share on the Friday before the crash was stunned to discover that the order was filled at $75 when the stock opened at that price on Monday. 

Stop-Limit Order: Stop-limit orders turn into limit orders when an investment trades at the price specified in the order.
Unlike stop orders -- which are filled at the market price when the stop price is hit -- stop-limit orders demand that the trades be made only at the specified price.
If it can't be made at that price, it doesn't get filled. 

Investors who wish to be out of a position, without the risk of receiving a worse-than-expected price from a market order, may use this type of order to specify the price at which the order must be filled.
But if the market moves quickly enough, it may be impossible for the broker to carry out the order because the investment has passed the specified price. 

Market-If-Touched Order: Market-if-touched orders are like stop orders in that they become market orders if a specified price is reached.
However, unlike a buy-stop order, a buy market-if-touched order is entered at a price below the current price, while a sell market-if-touched order is entered at a price above it.
As soon as the market trades at the specified price the floor broker will fill it at the best possible price. 

Fill-Or-Kill Order: The fill-or-kill order is one of several associated with the timing of trades.
It instructs a broker to buy or sell an investment at the specified price or better.
But if the investment can't be bought or sold immediately, the order is automatically canceled.
Gregory Bessemer, who came in second in the stock division of the recently completed U.S. Trading Championship, says he uses fill-or-kill orders almost exclusively when trading options. "I like to use them to feel out the market," he says. "If they don't fill it immediately, then I can start over at a new price or try again with the same price." 

Not-Held Order: This is another timing order.
It is a market order that allows floor brokers to take more time to buy or sell an investment, if they think they can get a better price by waiting.
Not-held orders, which are also known as "disregard the tape" orders, are always done at the customer's risk. 

One-Cancels-The-Other Order: This is really two orders in one, generally for the same security or commodity, instructing floor brokers to fill whichever order they can first and then cancel the other order.
In a fast-moving market, it prevents an investor from getting stuck with having made two trades on the same security. 

Specific-Time Order: This type of order couples many of the orders described above with instructions that the order must be carried out at or by a certain time. "On the close" can be added to many types of orders.
For example, "market-on-close orders" must be filled during the last few minutes of trading for the day at a price that is within the official closing range of prices as determined by the exchange. "Stop-close-only orders" are stop orders that only become active during the closing minutes of trading. "Day orders" expire at the end of the day on which they are entered, "good-till-canceled orders" have no expiration date.
Most brokers assume that all orders are day orders unless specified otherwise. 

On Oct. 19, 1987, some investors learned the consequences of entering "good-til-canceled limit orders" and then forgetting about them.
They found they had bought stock from limit orders that they might have entered weeks or months earlier and had forgotten to cancel.
It is always the responsibility of investors to keep track of the orders they have placed.
Investors who change their mind about buying or selling after an order has been filled are, usually, stuck with the consequences. 

Mr. Angrist writes on the options and commodities markets for The Wall Street Journal. 

