.START 

THROUGHOUT THE 1980s, investors have been looking for creative alternatives to traditional modes of financial planning.
Capital has been democratized, and people want in.
Too often, however, small investors are left with the same stale solutions that appealed to previous generations of fiduciary strategists. 

Now a startling new approach is available to building your financial portfolio without undue risk, without extensive planning and without hurting your life style one bit! This is particularly good news for those who hate risk, who are incapable of doing extensive amounts of planning and who refuse to see their life styles hurt in any way.
You know who you are. 

My revolutionary system is also useful for those who have tried customary forms of growing their currency cushion.
Like all Americans seeking chronic prosperity, I do find it necessary to plunge certain funds into conservative monetary tools, if only to assuage my father-in-law, who believes in such things.
So throughout the decade I have maintained my share of individual retirement accounts and CDs, and tinkered with stocks, bonds and mutual funds, as well as preserving my necessary position in the residential real-estate market.
Return on this fine portfolio has been modest when it has not been negative. 

Figure 1 demonstrates the performance of those businesses I've invested in during this prosperous decade (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Oct. 20, 1989).
Oil-related properties suffered a huge decline until I divested myself of all such stocks in 1985, at which point the industry, while not lighting up any Christmas trees, began a slow recovery. 

Likewise, mutual funds remained relatively flat until I made what was, for me, a serious investment.
By 1987, these properties were in a tailspin, causing my broker at Pru-Bache to remark that she'd "never seen anything like it." Concerned for her state of mind, I dropped them -- and the market instantly began its steady climb back to health.
Perhaps most dramatic was the performance of the metropolitan New York real-estate market, which was booming until I entered it in late 1988, at which time it posted the first negative compound annual growth rate in years. 

Disgusted, I cast around for a different way to plan my asset distribution, and with hardly any heavy breathing the answer struck me: I was doing it already! We've all got money to spend, some of it clearly disposable since we keep disposing of it.
Bank it?
Not really! Sock it away in long-term instruments?
Nonsense! Daily living is the best possible investment! 

Your priorities may be different, but here in Figure 2 is where I've chosen to build for the future: personal space; automotive pursuits; children's toys; gardening equipment, bulbs and shrubs; and finally, entertainment, perhaps the best investment of all.
All have paid off for me in double-digit annual growth and continue to provide significant potential.
At least, according to my calculations. 

Personal space (Figure 3) has grown 35% annually over the course of the decade, a performance that would compare positively with an investment in, say, synthetic-leather products for the interiors of cold-weather vehicles, which my cousin got into and sort of regrets to this day. 

The assortment of expensive children's toys that I have purchased wisely at a host of discount-toy brokerage firms (Figure 4) has increased handsomely in total asset value far beyond any personal investment except, perhaps, for my record collection, whose worth, I think it's safe to say, is incalculable. 

Continued investment in my 1984 subcompact has been part of my strategy (Figure 5), with present annual contributions now equaling more than 60% of the car's original value.
According to my calculations, these outlays should have brought the value of my sedan to more than $22,000 on the open market (Figure 6), where I plan to offer it shortly. 

Expansion of my living space has produced an obvious need for maintenance and construction of suitable lawns, shrubs and bushes fitting to its suburban locale.
I have thus committed sufficient personal outlay to ensure that my grounds and lodgings will never be short of greens and flowers.
My initial stake in this blooming enterprise has grown tenfold, according to my conservative calculations. 

At the same time, my share in a wide variety of entertainment pursuits has given perhaps the most dramatic demonstration of the benefits of creative personal financial planning.
Over the course of the decade, for instance, my return on investment in the area of poker alone (Figures 7A and 7B) has been most impressive, showing bodacious annual expansion with -- given the way my associates play -- no sign of abatement into the 1990s and beyond. 

With this personal strategy firmly in place, I look forward to years of fine life-style investments and increasing widespread leverage.
My kids' college education looms as perhaps the greatest future opportunity for spending, although I'll probably have to cash in their toy portfolio to take advantage of it.
But with every step I take, I'm building wealth.
You can, too, if you, like me, refuse to bite the bullet.
So go out there and eat that debt.
You're right there in the mainstream of American business, building value on the back of insupportable expenditures.
Henry Kravis, watch out! 

Mr. Schwartz is a business executive and writer in New York. 

