.START 

For Cheap Air Fares, 

Spend Christmas Aloft 

IT ISN'T TRUE that a 90-year old clergyman on a mission of mercy to a disaster area on Christmas Day can fly free.
But his circumstances are among the few that can qualify for the handful of really cheap airline tickets remaining in America. 

In recent years, carriers have become much more picky about who can fly on the cheap.
But there still are a few ways today's traveler can qualify under the airline's many restrictions. 

One of the best deals, though, may mean skipping Christmas dinner with the relatives.
This week, many carriers are announcing cut-rate fares designed to get people to fly on some of the most hallowed -- and slowest -- days of the year, including Christmas. 

In recent years, the airlines had waited until the last moment to court Christmas season vacationers with bargain fares.
That approach flopped: Last Christmas Day, a USAir Group Inc. DC-9 jetliner flew about seven passengers from Chicago to Pittsburgh. 

So this year, the airlines are getting a jump on holiday discounts.
They are cutting ticket prices by as much as 70% from normal levels for travel to most U.S. locations on Dec. 24, 25, 29, 30 and 31, and Jan. 4, 5 and 6.
The promotions -- dubbed everything from 'Tis the Season to be Jolly to Kringle fares -- put round-trip fares at $98, $148 and $198. 

"They're trying to keep planes flying on days they'd normally park them," says Roger Bard, president of Mr. Mitchell Travel Service in Burnsville, N.C. 

Expect, of course, sky-high prices on other dates near the holidays when the airlines know vacationers are eager to travel. 

Consider Adopting 

Your Spouse's Name 

IF CONTINENTAL Airlines has its way, couples like Marlo Thomas and Phil Donahue may find it a hassle to qualify for some new discounts. 

Continental, a Texas Air Corp. unit, recently unveiled a marketing program offering free companion tickets to business-class and first-class passengers on international flights.
The Continental catch: Only immediate family members are allowed, and they must have the same last name as the buyer of the ticket or legal proof they're related. 

That irritates many women who haven't taken their husbands' last name. "What a bunch of nonsense," says Jessica Crosby, president of the New York chapter of the National Association of Women Business Owners. "This sets things way back." 

Continental's logic: It doesn't want business companions abusing the promotion by falsely claiming to be related. "We accommodate their choice of names by allowing them to demonstrate" family affiliation with legal documents, says Jim O'Donnell, a senior vice president. 

But gay rights advocates are angry, too.
The Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund of New York City has received complaints from homosexual couples whom the airline doesn't recognize as family. "It's certainly discrimination," says attorney Evan Wolfson, whose group forced Trans World Airlines this year to change a rule that allowed travelers to transfer frequent flier awards only to family members. 

Take Your Vacation 

In a Hurricane Area 

WHEN HURRICANE Hugo careened through the Caribbean and the Atlantic coast states, it downed electric and telephone lines, shot coconuts through cottage rooftops, shattered windows and uprooted thousands of lives.
It also lowered some air fares. 

Since the hurricane, Midway Airlines Inc. and American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp., trimmed their one-way fares to the Virgin Islands to $109 from prices that were at times double that before the storm.
The fares are code-named Hugo, Compassion and Virgin Islands Aid. 

(Airlines aren't lowering fares to Northern California following this week's earthquake, but reservation agents can waive advance-purchase restrictions on discount fares for emergency trips.) 

Some hotels in the hurricane-stricken Caribbean promise money-back guarantees.
In Myrtle Beach, S.C., the damaged Yachtsman Resort offers daily rates as low as $35, or as much as 22% below regular prices. 

Says Michele Hoffman, a clerk in the resort's front office: "We don't have the outdoor pool, the pool table, ping pong table, snack bar or VCR, but we still have the indoor pool and Jacuzzi." 

Just Wait Until 

You're a Bit Older 

SENIOR CITIZENS have long received cheap air fares.
This year, the older someone is the bigger the discount. 

A senior citizen between 62 and 70 saves 70% off regular coach fare.
Travelers up to age 99 get a percentage discount matching their age.
And centenarians fly free in first class. 

Next month, Northwest Airlines says, a 108-year-old Lansing, Mich., woman is taking it up on the offer to fly with her 72-year-old son to Tampa, Fla.
Last year when Northwest first offered the promotion, only six centenarians flew free. 

If All Else Fails. . . . 

THE NATION'S carriers also provide discounts to Red Cross workers, retired military personnel and medical students.
There's even a special fare for clergy that doesn't require the usual stay over Saturday night.
That way, they can be home in time for work Sunday. 

