.START 

In finding "good news" in Berkeley's new freshman admissions plan ("The Privileged Class," editorial, Sept. 20), you're reading the headline but not the story. 

The plan indeed raises from 40% to 50% the number of freshmen applicants admitted strictly by academic criteria.
But that doesn't mean "half of the students attending Berkeley" will be admitted this way.
The plan is talking about applicants admitted, not students who enroll.
Since the "yield" from this top slice of applicants is relatively low, boosting admits from 40% to 50% will boost registrants from about 31% to 38% of the class. 

In addition, perhaps 5% of registrants will come from a new category consisting of applicants whose academic credentials "narrowly missed" gaining them admission in the first category. 

But against that combined increase of 12% in students chosen by academic criteria, the plan eliminates a large category in which admissions now are based on grades, test scores and "supplemental points" for factors such as high-school curriculum, English-language proficiency and an essay.
This category now accounts for about 19% of admits and 22% of registrants. 

The plan thus will decrease by 22%, for a net loss of 10%, the number of students admitted primarily by academic criteria. 

Who will take over these places?
The plan creates a new category of students from "socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds," a concept not yet defined, and gives them about 10% of the class. 

One of the plan's authors has defended the "socioeconomic disadvantage" category as perhaps making more sense than the current affirmative-action preferences based on race.
Perhaps it does.
But the new category does not replace or reduce Berkeley's broad racial preferences.
Nor will students from racial-minority groups who are admitted through the new category be counted against the affirmative-action "target" for their group. 

The plan thus places a large new affirmative-action program, based on "socioeconomic disadvantage," on top of the existing program based on race.
The role of academic criteria in choosing Berkeley's freshmen can only decline as a result. 

Stephen R. Barnett 

Professor of Law University of California 

Berkeley, Calif. 

