.START 

YOU WENT to college and thought you got an education.
Now you discover that you never learned the most important lesson: How to send your kids to college. 

True, when you went to college, there wasn't that much to learn.
Stick some money in an interest-bearing account and watch it grow.
Now, investment salesmen say it's time to take some risks if you want the kind of returns that will buy your toddler a ticket to Prestige U. in 18 years. 

In short, throw away the passbook and go for the glory. 

The reason is cost.
Nothing in the annals of tuition readied parents for the 1980s.
Tuitions at private colleges rose 154% in the 10 years ended in June of this year; that's twice the 77% increase in consumer prices for the same period. 

A year at Harvard now goes for $19,395.
By 2007, when this year's newborns hit campus, a four-year Ivy League sheepskin will cost $300,000, give or take a few pizzas-with-everything at exam time.
Stanford, MIT and other utmosts will cost no less. 

So what's a parent to do?
Some investment advisers are suggesting, in effect, a bet on a start-up investment pool -- maybe even on margin.
Others prefer deep-discount zero-coupon bonds.
Still others say, Why not take a chance on a high-octane growth fund? 

"You're not going to make it in a 5% bank account," says James Riepe, director of mutual funds at T. Rowe Price.
To get the necessary growth, adds Murray Ruffel, a marketing official at the Financial Programs mutual-fund group, "you need to go to the stock market." 

In other words, a little volatility never hurt. 

It never hurt anyone, that is, unless the growth funds don't grow when you need them to.
Or the zero-coupon bonds turn out not to have been discounted deeply enough to pay your kid's tuition.
That's the dilemma for today's parent.
Although many experts are advising risk, no one has a good answer for you if the risk doesn't pay off. 

Help may be on the way.
The antitrust division of the Justice Department is investigating the oddly similar tuition charges and increases among the top schools.
Fear of the price police could help cool things off in the 1990s. 

And then there's always State U.
But parents' craving for a top-rated education for their children is growing like their taste for fancy wheels and vintage wine. 

Belatedly aware of public concern, lawmakers and financial middlemen are working overtime to create and sell college savings and investment schemes. 

Their message, explicit or implicit, is that a good college will cost so much by whenever you want it that the tried and true won't do anymore.
Forget about Treasury bills or a money-market fund. 

The latest wave of marketing is instructive.
Several outfits -- including the Financial Programs, Franklin, and T. Rowe Price mutual-fund groups and the Edward D. Jones brokerage house -- are advertising "college planner" tables and charts that tell you how much you need to put aside regularly.
The calculations generally rely on an after-tax rate of return of 8% annually -- a rate historically obtainable by the individual in only one place, the stock market. 

Most of the mailers are free, but Denver-based Financial Programs sells, for $15, a version customized to the age of the child and the college of choice.
The figures are shocking.
To build a nest egg that would pay for Stanford when a current first-grader reaches college age, parents would need to set aside $773.94 a month -- for 12 years.
They can cut this to $691.09 a month if the investing keeps up through college.
And they can further reduce the monthly amount if they start saving earlier -- when mother and child come home from the hospital. 

Plugging a cheaper college into the formulas still doesn't generate an installment most people can live with.
Using a recent average private-school cost of about $12,500 a year, T. Rowe Price's planner prescribes $450 monthly if the plan begins when the child is six.
Since the formula assumes an 8% before-tax return in a mutual fund, there would also be $16,500 in taxes to pay over the 12 years. 

Not everyone is so pessimistic. "People are basically peddling a lot of fear," says Arthur Hauptman, a consultant to the American Council on Education in Washington.
He takes issue with projections that don't factor in students' own contribution, which reduces most parents' burden substantially. 

Still, he says, "it's no bad thing" if all the marketing prods people into putting aside a little more. "The situation you want to avoid is having somebody not save anything and hope they'll be able to do it out of current income," he says. "That's crazy." 

His advice: Don't panic.
Parents, he says, should aim at whatever regular investment sum they can afford.
Half the amount that the investment tables suggest might be a good goal, he adds.
That way, parents will reduce borrowings and outlays from current income when the time comes to pay tuition. 

Mr. Hauptman reckons that the best investment choice is mutual funds because they are managed and over time have nearly kept up with the broad stock averages.
He favors either an all-stock fund or a balanced fund that mixes both stocks and bonds. 

In their anxiety, however, parents and other student benefactors are flocking to new schemes.
They have laid out about $1 billion for so-called baccalaureate zero-coupon municipal bonds -- so far offered by Connecticut, Illinois, Virginia and eight other states.
And they have bought about $500 million in prepaid-tuition plans, offered in Michigan, Florida and Wyoming.
The prepaid plans take payment today -- usually at current tuitions or at a slight discount -- for a promise that tuition will be covered tomorrow. 

The baccalaureate bonds -- tax-free, offered in small denominations and usually containing a provision that they won't be called before maturity -- seem to be tailor-made for college savers.
Like other zeros, they pay all their interest at maturity, meaning that buyers can time things so that their bonds pay off just when Junior graduates from high school.
Their compounding effect is also alluring.
In June, Virginia sold bonds for $268.98 that will pay $1,000 in 2009. 

But Richard Anderson, head of the Forum for College Financing Alternatives, at Columbia University, a research group partly financed by the federal government, says zeros are particularly ill-suited.
Their price falls further than that of other bonds when inflation and interest rates kick up.
That won't matter if they are held to maturity, but if, for any reason, the parents need to sell them before then, there could be a severe loss of principal. 

Had zeros been available in 1972 and had parents bought a face amount equal to four years' tuition at the time, aiming for their children's 1988 enrollment, they would have been left with only enough to pay for two years, Mr. Anderson figures.
Most other bonds, however, would probably not have fared much better. 

The prepaid plans may be a good bet, provided the guarantee of future tuition is secure.
Issuing states generally limit the guarantees to in-state institutions, however, and buyers get refunds without much interest if the children don't attend the specified schools.
Two private groups are seeking Securities and Exchange Commission approval for plans that could be more broadly transferable.
Mr. Anderson wants the prestige colleges to sponsor such a plan. 

The issue here may be the soundness of the guarantee.
Prepayments, much like mutual-fund purchases, are pooled for investment.
Sponsors are naturally counting on their ability to keep ahead of tuition inflation with investment returns.
But buyers are essentially betting on a start-up investment fund with no track record -- and some have been encouraged to borrow to do so. 

One problem is that the Internal Revenue Service has decided that the investment earnings and gains of the sponsors' funds are taxable.
The colleges, as educational institutions, had hoped that wouldn't be the case. 

Based on historical rates of return, Mr. Anderson reckons a 100% stock portfolio, indexed to the market, would have kept up with tuition and taxes in the 20th century.
But sponsors might not pick the stocks that will match the market.
And they're leaning more toward fixed income, whose returns after tax have trailed tuition increases. "I'm not sure they're going to make it work," says Mr. Anderson. 

What happens if the sponsors don't have the cash to pay the tuitions?
Florida and Wyoming have backed up their guarantees with the full faith and credit of the state governments, meaning that taxpayers will pick up any slack.
Not so Michigan.
Its plan is set up as an independent agency.
The state says there's no worry -- investment returns, combined with fees and the gains from unused plans, will provide all the cash it needs. 

Mr. Putka covers education from The Wall Street Journal's Boston bureau. 

If you start saving for your child's eduction on Jan. 1, 1990, here's the monthly sum you will need to invest to pay for four years at Yale, Notre Dame and University of Minnesota.
Figures assume a 7% annual rise in tuition, fees, room and board and an 8% annual investment return. 

Note: These figures are only for mandatory charges and don't include books, transportation etc. 

*For in-state students 

Source: PaineWebber Inc. 

