.START 

IN SIZING UP the risks of stock-market investments, there's probably no starting place better than "beta." But investors better not ignore its limitations, either. 

Beta is a handy gauge that measures the volatility of a stock or stock mutual fund.
For any given move in the overall market, it suggests how steeply that particular issue might rise or fall. 

Beta figures are widely available and easy to interpret.
The beta of the broad market, typically defined as the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, is always 1.0.
So a stock with a beta of 0.5 is half as volatile, one at 1.5 is 50% more volatile, and so on. 

Cautious investors should generally go with stocks that have low betas.
Go with high-beta stocks to get the biggest payoff from a bet on a bull market. 

Remember, though, that beta also has important limitations. "Beta is only part of the risk in a stock," says William F. Sharpe, the Stanford University emeritus professor who developed the measure. "There is risk that is not associated with market moves, and the beta doesn't tell you the magnitude of that." 

In particular, beta doesn't measure the company- and industry-specific risk associated with an individual stock.
That "business" risk is very significant for an investor with only a few stocks, but it virtually disappears in a large and well-diversified portfolio. 

Beta is also a poor indicator of the risk in stock groups that march to their own drummer.
In particular, the prices of gold and other precious-metals stocks shoot up and down, but the stocks tend to have low betas because their moves are not market-inspired. 

Concern that investors could misinterpret such readings led the American Association of Individual Investors to eliminate beta figures for precious-metals funds in the 1989 edition of its mutual-fund guide. 

"Our fear was people would look just at the beta {of a gold fund} and say here is an investment with very low risk," says John Markese, director of research for the Chicago-based group. "In reality it's very volatile, but the movements are not because of market movements." 

