.START 

LEBANESE LAWMAKERS APPROVED a peace plan but Aoun rejected it. 

Lebanon's Parliament passed the power-sharing accord to end the country's 14-year-old conflict, but the Christian military leader wad the plan was "full of ambiguities." The Arab League-sponsored pact, drafted during three weeks of talks at the Saudi Arabian resort of Taif, includes Syrian proposals for at least a partial troop pullout from Lebanon, and guarantees an equal number of seats for Moslems and Christians in the Parliament. 

The rejection by Aoun, who has demanded a total and immediate pull-out of Damascus's 33,000 troops, puts the future of the agreement in doubt. 

NORTHERN CALIFORNIA BRACED for earthquake-related traffic jams. 

As rescuers pressed their efforts after finding a survivor in a collapsed freeway, the San Francisco Bay area girded for hundreds of thousands of commuters seeking to avoid routes ravaged by last Tuesday's tremor.
In Oakland, officials said the 57-year-old longshoreman who spent four days entombed in rubble was in critical condition with slight improvement.
Estimates of damage in the area, visited Friday by Bush, topped $5 billion. 

The baseball commissioner announced that the third game of the World Series between the Giants and the Athletics wouldn't resume until Friday. 

THE U.S. IS REQUIRED to notify foreign dictators of certain coup plans. 

Under guidelines included in an exchange of letters between the Reagan administration and the Senate Intelligence panel last year, the U.S. must inform foreign dictators of plans likely to endanger their lives.
The existence of the policy became known after Bush disclosed it to seven GOP senators last week, citing the plan as an example of congressional requirements the administration contends contribute to the failure of covert actions, officials said. 

Bush conceded that the requirement didn't affect a decision to lend only minor support to this month's failed effort to oust Panama's Noriega, aides said. 

The shuttle Atlantis's crew prepared to return to Earth today several hours earlier than planned to avoid high winds forecast at the landing site at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
The five astronauts, who stowed gear and tested the spacecraft's steering, said they were unconcerned about the touchy weather expected in the Mojave Desert. 

Commonwealth leaders issued a declaration giving South Africa six months to deliver on pledges to ease apartheid or face new reprisals.
The 49-nation organization, meeting in Malaysia, called for tighter financial pressure immediately.
Britain's Prime Minister Thatcher alone dissented. 

East Germany's leadership vowed swift action to ease travel to the West.
Despite the pledge by the Communist rulers, tens of thousands of people across the country staged marches over the weekend to demand democratic freedoms.
In Leipzig, more than 500 people met with local party officials to discuss internal changes. 

The Senate convicted federal Judge Alcee Hastings of Miami of eight impeachment articles, removing him from the bench.
The chamber voted 69-26 Friday to convict the judge of perjury and bribery conspiracy.
It marked the first time a U.S. official was impeached on charges of which a jury had acquitted him. 

Rep. Garcia and his wife were found guilty by a federal jury in New York of extorting $76,000 from Wedtech Corp. in return for official acts by the New York Democrat.
The jury also convicted them of extortion in obtaining a $20,000 interest-free loan from an officer of the defunct defense contractor. 

Authorities in Honduras launched an investigation into the cause of Saturday's crash of a Honduran jetliner that killed 132 of the 146 people aboard.
The Boeing 727, en route to Honduras from Costa Rica via Nicaragua, smashed into the hills outside Tegucigalpa as it approached the capital's airport in high winds and low clouds. 

The U.S. and Israel have been holding what an aide to Prime Minister Shamir called intense telephone negotiations in an effort to bridge differences over Mideast peace moves.
The Labor Party, meanwhile, threatened to support a parliamentary motion to topple the coalition unless Shamir showed flexibility on Arab-Israeli talks. 

Nicaragua's Defense Ministry said a group of Contra rebels ambushed two trucks carrying troops in northern Nicaragua, killing 18 of the soldiers.
The incident occurred Saturday night.
The Sandinista government and the U.S.-backed insurgents agreed in March to suspend offensive operations, but there has been sporadic fighting. 

Scientists have isolated a molecule that may hold potential as a treatment for disruptions of the immune system, ranging from organ-transplant rejection, to allergies and asthma, Immunex Corp. said.
The molecule is the mouse version of a protein called the interleukin-4 receptor, which directs the growth and function of white blood cells. 

Died: Alfred Hayes, 79, former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Saturday, in New Canaan, Conn. 

