.START 

And you thought the only reason to save your canceled checks was to prepare for an IRS audit. 

Reggie Jackson, the retired baseball star, has found another use for them.
Mr. Jackson, who won the nickname "Mr. October" for his World Series exploits, is selling some of his canceled checks to autograph collectors through a dealer for as much as $500 each. 

Dealers say the budding trade in Mr. Jackson's canceled checks is unusual. "I don't know of any living ballplayer that's ever done it," says Jack Smalling, a dealer in Ames, Iowa, and a recognized expert in the field of baseball autographs. 

An initial batch of Mr. Jackson's checks was on sale at a baseball-card show held in San Francisco over Labor Day weekend.
Mr. Jackson showed up at the affair to sign autographs for a fee as well. 

"For someone who has everything else -- Reggie's jersey, cap and cards -- his checks might be a nice addition," says William Vizas, owner of Bill's Sports Collectibles in Denver, who examined the checks at the San Francisco card show. 

For years, the canceled checks of a small number of well-known baseball players have been bought and sold.
But these players were dead. "Maybe three years ago, there were a lot of {Ty} Cobbs in the hobby, and awhile back there were Babe Ruth checks," says Mr. Smalling. 

However, the thought of a living player selling his checks rubs some people the wrong way. "Maybe I'm a little stuffy, but I wouldn't sell them," sniffs Bob Machon, owner of Papa's Sports Cards in Menlo Park, Calif. "Who knows how much they'll be worth 100 years from now?" 

And Mr. Smalling doesn't believe they're worth all that much now. "I don't think the checks are worth $15 apiece," he says. 

Why Mr. Jackson, who couldn't be reached for comment, has made some of his checks available for sale isn't clear.
He probably hasn't done it for the cash. 

"I would say he's definitely not in need of money," says Matt Merola, an agent of Mr. Jackson's based in New York. "He has good investments." 

And Mr. Jackson probably has opened new checking accounts, too.
Or at least he should. "I assume those accounts are closed," says Mr. Smalling, referring to the accounts of the canceled checks. "I don't think he'd want to give out his current account numbers." 

