.START 

Confidence in the pound is widely expected to take another sharp dive if trade figures for September, due for release tomorrow, fail to show a substantial improvement from July and August's near-record deficits. 

Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson's restated commitment to a firm monetary policy has helped to prevent a freefall in sterling over the past week.
But analysts reckon underlying support for sterling has been eroded by the chancellor's failure to announce any new policy measures in his Mansion House speech last Thursday. 

This has increased the risk of the government being forced to increase base rates to 16% from their current 15% level to defend the pound, economists and foreign exchange market analysts say. 

"The risks for sterling of a bad trade figure are very heavily on the down side," said Chris Dillow, senior U.K. economist at Nomura Research Institute. 

"If there is another bad trade number, there could be an awful lot of pressure," noted Simon Briscoe, U.K. economist for Midland Montagu, a unit of Midland Bank PLC. 

Forecasts for the trade figures range widely, but few economists expect the data to show a very marked improvement from the #2 billion ($3.2 billion) deficit in the current account reported for August.
The August deficit and the #2.2 billion gap registered in July are topped only by the #2.3 billion deficit of October 1988. 

Sanjay Joshi, European economist at Baring Brothers & Co., said there is no sign that Britain's manufacturing industry is transforming itself to boost exports.
At the same time, he remains fairly pessimistic about the outlook for imports, given continued high consumer and capital goods inflows.
He reckons the current account deficit will narrow to only #1.8 billion in September.
However, Mr. Dillow said he believes that a reduction in raw material stockbuilding by industry could lead to a sharp drop in imports.
Combined with at least some rebound in exports after August's unexpected decline, the deficit could narrow to as little as #1.3 billion. 

Mr. Briscoe, who also forecasts a #1.3 billion current account gap, warns that even if the trade figures are bullish for sterling, the currency won't advance much because investors will want to see further evidence of the turnaround before adjusting positions. 

Nevertheless, he noted, "No one will want to go into the trade figures without a flat position" in the pound. 

Meanwhile, overall evidence on the economy remains fairly clouded.
In his Mansion House speech, Mr. Lawson warned that a further slowdown can be expected as the impact of the last rise in interest rates earlier this month takes effect.
U.K. base rates are at their highest level in eight years. 

But consumer expenditure data released Friday don't suggest that the U.K. economy is slowing that quickly.
The figures show that spending rose 0.1% in the third quarter from the second quarter and was up 3.8% from a year ago.
This compares with a 1.6% rise in the second from the first quarter and a 5.4% increase from the second quarter of 1988. 

Mr. Dillow said the data show the economy "is still quite strong," but suggestions that much of the spending went on services rather than consumer goods should reduce fears of more import rises. 

Certainly, the chancellor has made it clear that he is prepared to increase interest rates again if necessary to both ensure that a substantial slowdown does take place and that sterling doesn't decline further.
Thursday, he reminded his audience that the government "cannot allow the necessary rigor of monetary policy to be undermined by exchange rate weakness." 

Analysts agree there is little holding sterling firm at the moment other than Mr. Lawson's promise that rates will be pushed higher if necessary.
And, they warn, any further drop in the government's popularity could swiftly make this promise sound hollow. 

Sterling was already showing some signs of a lack of confidence in Mr. Lawson's promise Friday.
In European trading it declined to $1.5890 and 2.9495 marks from $1.5940 and 2.9429 marks late Thursday. 

Economists suggested that if the pound falls much below 2.90 marks, the government will be forced to increase rates to 16%, both to halt any further decline and ensure that the balance of monetary policy remains unchanged. 

Friday's Market Activity 

The dollar posted gains in quiet trading as concerns about equities abated. 

Foreign exchange dealers said that the currency market has begun to distance itself from the volatile stock exchange, which has preoccupied the market since Oct. 13, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged more than 190 points. 

Currency analysts predict that in the coming week the foreign exchange market will shift its focus back to economic fundamentals, keeping a close eye out for any signs of monetary easing by U.S. Federal Reserve. 

Late in the New York trading day, the dollar was quoted at 1.8578 marks, up from 1.8470 marks late Thursday in New York.
The U.S. currency was also changing hands at 142.43 yen, up from 141.70 yen in New York late Thursday. 

In Tokyo on Monday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.95 yen, up from Friday's Tokyo close of 141.35 yen. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $367.30 an ounce, up 20 cents.
Estimated volume was a light 2.4 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Monday, gold was quoted at $366.50 an ounce. 

