.START 

AMONG THE CATFISH farmers in the watery delta land of Humphreys County, Miss., Allen D. Tharp of Isola was one of the best known and most enterprising. 

He sold quarter-inch fingerlings to stock other farmers' ponds, and he bought back one-pound-or-so food-fish that he "live-hauled" to market along with his own whiskery crop.
And he nearly always bought and sold for cash. 

Along the way, Mr. Tharp omitted a total of $1.5 million from his receipts reported on federal tax returns for three years.
The returns landed in the hands of an Internal Revenue Service criminal investigator, Samuel James Baker.
Mr. Baker interviewed or wrote to hundreds of catfish farmers, live-haulers and processors throughout the South before coming up with detailed estimates of purchases and sales, in pounds and dollars, by Mr. Tharp and others. 

Unknown to Mr. Tharp, he had fouled his net on a special IRS project to catch catfish farmers and haulers inclined to cheat on their taxes.
Confronted with the evidence, Mr. Tharp pleaded guilty to one charge of filing a false return and was fined $5,000 and sentenced to 18 months in prison.
He also owes a lot of back taxes, interest and civil fraud penalties. 

A lot of taxpayers out there aren't as paranoid as one might think.
Federal and state tax enforcers develop many group targets for investigation, on the basis of occupation, high income, type of income, or some other characteristic that may signal an opportunity or tendency to hide income or exaggerate deductions. 

Many professions long have seemed to be targets because of the exotic or ludicrous efforts of some members to offset high income with fake losses from phony tax shelters: dentists who invested in dubiously dubbed foreign films or airline pilots who raised racehorses on their days off.
Mail-order ministers have been squelched.
Now, television and radio evangelists are under scrutiny. 

The IRS recently won part of its long-running battle with the Church of Scientology over exemptions when the U.S. Supreme Court held that members' payments to the church weren't deductible because the members received services in return. 

IRS statistics show that the more persistent hiders of income among sole proprietors of businesses include used-car dealers, entertainment producers, masons, roofers, and taxi owners.
Small businesses in general account for almost 40% of unreported personal income, the IRS has said. 

Once such abuses become so pervasive, the IRS builds another factor into its secret computer formula for selecting returns for audit and doesn't need special projects for them.
San Franciscans have a much higher incidence of audits than average because more of them score high under that formula, not because IRS agents envy their life styles. 

Many openings for mass cheating, such as questionable tax shelters and home offices, have gaped so broadly that Congress has passed stringent laws to close them.
Deductions of charitable gifts of highly valued art now must be accompanied by appraisals.
And laws requiring the reporting of more varieties of transactions have enabled the IRS to rely on computers to ferret out discrepancies with returns and to generate form-letter inquiries to taxpayers. 

Unreported alimony income can be spotted by computer because a payer of alimony (who gets a deduction) must report the former spouse's Social Security number.
Passport applicants now must give Social Security numbers, enabling the IRS to see whether Americans living abroad are filing required U.S. returns. 

But while IRS computers focus routinely on target groups like these, the agency has assigned many agents to special projects that need more personal attention.
In most cases, the IRS says, these projects are local or regional, rather than national, and arise because auditors in an area detect some pattern of abuse among, say, factory workers claiming that having a multitude of dependents frees them from tax withholding or yacht owners deducting losses from sideline charter businesses. 

The national office currently has 21 noncriminal audit projects, according to Marshall V. Washburn, deputy assistant commissioner for examination.
Auditors involved in noncriminal projects can't send anyone to jail, but they can make life miserable in other ways -- for one, by imposing some of the 150 different civil penalties for negligence, failure to file a return, and the like. 

The targeted audit groups include direct sellers -- people who sell cosmetics, housewares and other items door to door or at home parties -- and employers who label workers as independent contractors instead of employees, to avoid the employer share of payroll taxes. 

Other projects look for offenders among waiters who get cash tips, people who engage in large cash transactions, and people whose returns show they sold a home for a profit without reinvesting the capital gain in another home by the end of the same year; the gain must be rolled over within two years to defer tax. 

And now that returns must show dependents' Social Security numbers, the IRS wants to see which dependents show up on more than one return -- and which dependents turn out to be deceased. 

Impetus for the direct-seller project came from a congressional hearing some years back.
It prompted an IRS study that found many sellers were concealing income and treating large amounts of nondeductible travel and other personal expenses as business costs, Mr. Washburn says.
The study provided criteria for singling out returns of "potentially noncompliant" taxpayers who report low income and large expenses from a part-time business. 

The Tax Court recently denied business deductions by Mr. and Mrs. Peter S. Rubin of Cherry Hill, N.J., who both were part-time distributors of Amway products in addition to their regular jobs as sales people in other fields.
For 1984, they reported gross income of $1,647 from Amway sales, offset by expenses totaling $16,746 -- including car costs of $6,805 and travel and entertainment costs of $5,088.
The Tax Court didn't believe that the Rubins, who earned $65,619 in their regular jobs, treated the sideline as a real business and derived "merely incidental elements of recreation and other personal pleasure and benefits" from it. 

The Direct Selling Association, a trade group, points out that its members, which include Amway Corp., cooperate with the IRS to distribute tax-compliance material to sales people and are helping to prepare a public-service television program on the subject. 

The independent-contractor project, which began in 1988, involves about 350 IRS agents.
In the fiscal nine months ended June 30, reports Raymond P. Keenan, assistant commissioner for collection, they examined about 13,000 employers, assessed more than $67 million in delinquent employment taxes, and reclassified about 56,000 workers as employees instead of self-employed contractors. 

The number of misclassified workers may be in the millions, mostly paid by small firms.
Many workers, especially professionals, want to remain independent to avoid tax withholding and to continue to deduct many expenses that employees can't.
But many others, who want to qualify for employee benefits and unemployment compensation, become tipsters for the IRS, says Jerry Lackey, who manages the IRS project's force of nine agents in north and central Florida from Orlando.
Firms that are paying employment taxes also provide leads to competitors that aren't, he says. 

In his area, Mr. Lackey continues, the miscreant employers most commonly are in construction -- doing framing, drywall, masonry and similar work.
But a medical clinic with about 20 employees wrongly listed all of them -- including physicians and receptionists -- as independent contractors.
The IRS assessed the clinic $350,000 in back payroll taxes.
It assessed nearly $500,000 against a cruise-ship company that carried about 100 deckhands, cooks, bartenders, entertainers and other employees as self-employed independents. 

Revenue-short states also are becoming more aggressive pursuers of tax delinquents, and perhaps none tracks them down with more relish than does New York since it acquired an $80 million computer system in 1985.
The state's tax enforcers have amassed data bases from other New York agencies that license or register professionals and businesses; from exchange agreements with the IRS, 24 other states, and two Canadian provinces, and even from phonebook Yellow Pages.
Thus armed for massive matching of documents by computer, they single out high-income groups, looking primarily for people who haven't filed New York income-tax returns. 

The state has combed through records relating to architects, stockbrokers, lawyers in the New York City area, construction workers from out of the state, and homeowners who claim to be residents of other states -- especially Florida, which has no personal income tax.
Soon to feel the glare of attention are lawyers elsewhere in the state, doctors, dentists, and accountants, says Frederick G. Hicks, director of the tax-department division that develops the computer-matching programs. 

The department has collected over $6.5 million from brokers so far and recommended more than 30 of them for criminal prosecution.
In the early stage of checking people with incomes exceeding $500,000 who were filing nonresident returns, it squeezed $7.5 million out of a man who was posing as a Florida resident. "We think we can reclaim hundreds of millions of dollars just through the nonresident project," Mr. Hicks declares. 

Mr. Schmedel is editor of The Wall Street Journal's Tax Report column. 

