.START 

USX Corp. and its Japanese partner, Kobe Steel Ltd., agreed to form a joint venture to build a new plant to produce hot-dipped galvanized sheet products, mainly for the automotive market. 

Terms weren't disclosed for the plant, which will have annual capacity of 600,000 tons. 

The move by the nation's largest steelmaker follows a string of earlier announcements by other major steel companies.
Bethlehem Steel Corp., LTV Corp. and Armco Inc. all have plans to build additional lines for such coated corrosion-resistant steel. 

The surge in production, analysts say, raises questions about capacity outpacing demand.
They note that most of the new plants will come on line in 1992, when the current import trade restraint program ends, which could result in more imports. 

"There's too much capacity," contended Charles Bradford, an analyst with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. "I don't think there's anyone not building one." He does add, however, that transplanted Japanese car makers are boosting the levels of U.S.-made steel in their autos, instead of relying heavily on imported steel.
That trend could increase demand for hot-dipped galvanized sheet. 

The hot-dipped galvanized segment is one of the fastest-growing and most profitable segments of the steel market, coveted by all major integrated steelmakers wanting to maintain an edge over smaller minimills and reconstructed mills -- those spun off to employees. 

Indeed, USX said it expects the market for coated sheet steel to reach 12 million tons annually by 1992, compared with 10.2 million tons shipped in 1988.
For the first eight months of 1989, analysts say shipments of hot-dipped galvanized steel increased about 8% from a year earlier, while overall steel shipments were up only 2.4%. 

USX and Kobe Steel hope to reach a definitive agreement establishing the 50-50 partnership by the end of the year, with construction tentatively slated for the spring of 1990 and production by 1992. 

USX already has six lines in existing plants producing hot-dipped galvanized steel, but this marks the first so-called greenfield plant for such production.
Moreover, it will boost by 50% USX's current hot-dipped capacity of 1,275,000 tons. 

The company said it doesn't expect the new line's capacity to adversely affect the company's existing hot-dipped galvanizing lines. 

Steelmakers have also been adding capacity of so-called electrogalvanized steel, which is another way to make coated corrosion-resistant steel.
One of the advantages of the hot-dipped process is that it allows the steel to be covered with a thicker coat of zinc more quickly. 

