.START 

Ing.
C. Olivetti & Co., claiming it has won the race in Europe to introduce computers based on a powerful new microprocessor chip, unveiled its CP486 computer yesterday. 

The product is the first from a European company based on Intel Corp. 's new 32-bit 486tm microprocessor, which works several times faster than previously available chips.
Hewlett-Packard Co. became the first company world-wide to announce a product based on the chip earlier this month, but it won't start shipping the computers until early next year. 

An Olivetti spokesman said the company's factories are already beginning to produce the machine, and that it should be available in Europe by December. "What this means is that Europeans will have these machines in their offices before Americans do," the spokesman said. 

The new chip "is a very big step in computing, and it is important that Olivetti be one of the first out on the market with this product," said Patricia Meagher Davis, an analyst at James Capel & Co. in London.
Executives at Olivetti, whose earnings have been steadily sliding over the past couple of years, have acknowledged that in the past they have lagged at getting new technology to market. 

Ms. Davis said the new machines could steal some sales away from Olivetti's own minicomputers, but would bring new sales among professionals such as engineers, stockbrokers and medical doctors.
Although Olivetti's profits tumbled 40% in the first half of this year, she believes Olivetti's restructuring last fall and its introduction of new products will begin to bear fruit with an earnings rebound next year, especially if it can fulfill its promise to deliver the new machines by December. "We think the worst is over" in the European information-technology market, she said. 

Depending on the type of software and peripherals used, the machines can serve either as the main computer in a network of many terminals (a role usually filled by a minicomputer), as a technical workstation or as a very fast personal computer. "It's the missing link" in Olivetti's product line between small personal computers and higher-priced minicomputers, the Olivetti spokesman said.
He added that Olivetti will continue making its LSX minicomputer line. 

The machines will cost around $16,250 on average in Europe.
The Intel 486 chip can process 15 million instructions per second, or MIPS, while Intel's previous 386 chip could handle only 3 to 6 MIPS. 

Olivetti also plans to sell the CP486 computer in the U.S. starting next year through Olivetti USA and through its ISC/Bunker Ramo unit, which specializes in automating bank-branch networks. 

