.START 

Rorer Group Inc. will report that third-quarter profit rose more than 15% from a year earlier, though the gain is wholly due to asset sales, Robert Cawthorn, chairman, president and chief executive officer, said. 

His projection indicates profit in the latest quarter of more than $17.4 million, or 55 cents a share, compared with $15.2 million, or 48 cents a share, a year ago. 

Mr. Cawthorn said in an interview that sales will show an increase from a year ago of "somewhat less than 10%." Through the first six months of 1989, sales had grown about 12% from the year-earlier period. 

Growth of 10% would make sales for the latest quarter $269 million, compared with $244.6 million a year ago. 

Mr. Cawthorn said the profit growth in the latest quarter was due to the sale of two Rorer drugs.
Asilone, an antacid, was sold to Boots PLC, London.
Thrombinar, a drug used to stanch bleeding, was sold to Jones Medical Industries Inc., St. Louis.
He said Rorer sold the drugs for "nice prices" and will record a combined, pretax gain on the sales of $20 million. 

As the gain from the sales indicates, operating profit was "significantly" below the year-earlier level, Mr. Cawthorn said.
Rorer in July had projected lower third-quarter operating profit but higher profit for all of 1989.
He said the company is still looking for "a strong fourth quarter in all areas -- sales, operating income and net income." 

Mr. Cawthorn attributed the decline in third-quarter operating profit to the stronger dollar, which reduces the value of overseas profit when it is translated into dollars; to accelerated buying of Rorer products in the second quarter because of a then-pending July 1 price increase, and to higher marketing expenses for Rorer's Maalox antacid, whose sales and market share in the U.S. had slipped in the first half of 1989.
He said Rorer opted to sell Asilone and Thrombinar to raise revenue that would "kick start" its increased marketing efforts behind Maalox, still its top-selling product with about $215 million in world-wide sales in 1988. "We had underfunded Maalox for a year," he said, because the company was concentrating on research and development and promoting other drugs. 

He said Rorer will spend $15 million to $20 million more on Maalox advertising and promotion in the second half of 1989 than in the year-earlier period.
A "big chunk" of that additional spending came in the third quarter, he said. 

