.START 

A labor-management group is preparing a revised buy-out bid for United Airlines parent UAL Corp. that would transfer majority ownership to employees while leaving some stock in public hands, according to people familiar with the group. 

The group has been discussing a proposal valued in a range of $225 to $240 a share, or $5.09 billion to $5.42 billion.
But to avoid the risk of rejection, the group doesn't plan to submit the plan formally at a UAL board meeting today.
Instead, the group is raising the proposal informally to try to test the board's reaction. 

People familiar with the company say the board isn't likely to give quick approval to any offer substantially below the $300-a-share, $6.79 billion buy-out bid that collapsed last week after banks wouldn't raise needed loans and after a key partner, British Airways PLC, dropped out. 

In composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange, UAL closed at $168.50 a share, down $21.625. 

But the pilots union, which has been pushing for a takeover since 1987, appears to be pressing ahead with the revised bid to avoid further loss of momentum even though it hasn't found a partner to replace British Air. 

Although the bidding group hasn't had time to develop its latest idea fully or to discuss it with banks, it believes bank financing could be obtained.
After the collapse of the last effort, the group doesn't plan to make any formal proposal without binding commitments from banks covering the entire amount to be borrowed. 

Under the type of transaction being discussed, the pilot-management group would borrow several billion dollars from banks that could then be used to finance a cash payment to current holders.
Those current holders would also receive minority interests in the new company.
For example, the group could offer $200 a share in cash plus stock valued at $30 a share.
UAL currently has 22.6 million shares, fully diluted. 

The new structure would be similar to a recapitalization in which holders get a special dividend yet retain a controlling ownership interest.
The difference is that current holders wouldn't retain majority ownership or control. 

The failed takeover would have given UAL employees 75% voting control of the nation's second-largest airline, with management getting 10% control and British Air 15%.
It wasn't clear how the ownership would stack up under the new plan, but employees would keep more than 50%.
Management's total could be reduced, and the public could get more than the 15% control that had been earmarked for British Air. 

One option the board is likely to consider today is some sort of cooling-off period.
Although the pilots are expected to continue to pursue the bid, UAL Chairman Stephen Wolf may be asked to withdraw from the buy-out effort, at least temporarily, and to return to running the company full time. 

The board could eventually come under some pressure to sell the company because its members can be ousted by a majority shareholder vote, particularly since one-third of UAL stock is held by takeover stock speculators who favor a sale.
The labor-management buy-out group plans to keep its offer on the table in an apparent attempt to maintain its bargaining position with the board. 

However, the only outsider who has emerged to lead such a shareholder vote, Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis, who triggered the buy-out with a $5.4 billion bid in early August, is hanging back -- apparently to avoid being blamed for contributing to the deal's collapse. 

Three top advisers to Mr. Davis visited New York late last week, at least in part to confer with executives at Citicorp.
Mr. Davis had paid $6 million for Citicorp's backing of his last bid.
But Citicorp has lost some credibility because it also led the unsuccessful effort to gain bank loans for the labor-management group. 

On Friday, British Air issued a statement saying it "does not intend to participate in any new deal for the acquisition of UAL in the foreseeable future." However, several people said that British Air might yet rejoin the bidding group and that the carrier made the statement to answer questions from British regulators about how it plans to use proceeds of a securities offering previously earmarked for the UAL buy-out. 

Also late last week, UAL flight attendants agreed to participate with the pilots in crafting a revised offer.
But the machinists union, whose opposition helped scuttle the first buy-out bid, is likely to favor a recapitalization with a friendly third-party investor. 

One advantage the buy-out group intends to press with the board is that pilots have agreed to make $200 million in annual cost concessions to help finance a bid. 

Speculation has also arisen that the UAL executive most closely identified with the failure to gain bank financing, chief financial officer John Pope, may come under pressure to resign.
However, people familiar with the buy-out group said Mr. Pope's departure would weaken the airline's management at a critical time. 

Despite the buy-out group's failure to obtain financing, UAL remains obligated to pay $26.7 million in investment banking and legal fees to the group's advisers, Lazard Freres & Co., Salomon Brothers Inc., and Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton & Garrison. 

