.START 

In the wake of a slide in sterling, a tailspin in the stock market, and a string of problematic economic indicators, British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson promised gradual improvement in the U.K. economy. 

In a speech prepared for delivery to London's financial community, Mr. Lawson summed up current economic policy as a battle to wring inflation out of the British economy, using high interest rates as "the essential instrument" to carry out the campaign.
Two weeks after boosting base rates to 15%, he pledged that "rates will have to remain high for some time to come." 

Mr. Lawson also made it clear that he would be watching exchange rates carefully.
A sinking pound makes imports more expensive and increases businesses' expectations of future inflation, he argued.
In an apparent warning to currency traders who have lately been selling the British currency, he stated that the exchange rates will have a "major role in the assessment of monetary conditions." 

In reaffirming the current monetary policy of using high interest rates to fight inflation and shore up the pound, Mr. Lawson dismissed other approaches to managing the economy.
He said he monitors the money-supply figures, but doesn't give them paramount importance, as some private and government economists have suggested.
Mr. Lawson also dismissed the possibility of imposing direct credit controls on Britain's financial system. 

Mr. Lawson's speech, delivered at the Lord Mayor of London's annual dinner at Mansion House, came on the heels of a grueling period for the U.K. economy.
Two weeks ago, in a campaign to blunt inflation at home and arrest a world-wide plunge in the pound, he raised base rates a full percentage point to 15%.
Despite the increase, the British currency slid below a perceived threshold of three marks early last week.
It was quoted at 2.9428 marks in late New York trading Wednesday. 

Leading up to the speech was a drumroll of economic statistics suggesting that the British war on inflation will be more bruising than previously assumed.
Unemployment in September dropped to 1,695,000, the lowest level since 1980.
While lower joblessness is generally good news, the hefty drop last month indicates that the economy isn't slowing down as much as hoped -- despite a doubling of interest rates over the last 16 months. 

Meanwhile, average earnings in Britain were up 8.75% in August over the previous year. 

Another inflationary sign came in a surge in building-society lending to a record #10.2 billion ($16.22 billion) last month, a much higher level than economists had predicted. 

In a separate speech prepared for delivery at the dinner, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Bank of England governor, conceded that "demand pressures were even more buoyant than had been appreciated" when the British economy was heating up last year.
He added that "there's no quick-fix solution" to the economic woes, and said "tight monetary policy is the right approach." 

Discussing the recent slide in stock prices, the central bank governor stated that "the markets now appear to have steadied" after the "nasty jolt" of the 190.58-point plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average a week ago.
Although the New York market plunge prompted a 70.5-point drop in the London Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 Share Index, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton declared "that the experience owed nothing to the particular problems of the British economy." Specifically, he pointed out that compared with the U.S. market, the U.K. has far fewer highly leveraged junk-bond financings. 

Discussing future monetary arrangements, Mr. Lawson repeated the Thatcher government's commitment to join the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System, but he didn't indicate when. 

