.START 

The government issues its first reading on third-quarter real gross national product this week in a report that is expected to disclose much tamer inflation. 

The consensus view on real GNP, the total value of the nation's output of goods and services adjusted for inflation, calls for a 2.3% gain, down from the second quarter's 2.5%, according to MMS International, a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc., New York.
But inflation, as measured by the GNP deflator in Thursday's report, is expected to rise only 3.5%, down from 4.6% in the second quarter. 

"Inflation could be a real surprise," said Samuel D. Kahan, chief financial economist at Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc., in Chicago. "If that gets people excited, it could serve as an impetus to the fixed-income markets to lower their rates," he added. 

The week's other notable indicators include mid-October auto sales, September durable goods orders as well as September personal income, personal consumption and the saving rate.
Most are expected to fall below previous-month levels. 

Many economists see even slower GNP growth for the remainder of the year, with some leaning more strongly toward a possible recession.
In addition to softer production data, weaker housing starts and lower corporate profits currently in evidence, some analysts believe the two recent natural disasters -- Hurricane Hugo and the San Francisco earthquake -- will carry economic ramifications in the fourth quarter. 

The recent one-day, 190-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average seems to be significant to economists mainly for its tacit comment on the poor quality of third-quarter profits now being reported. 

"The stock market is sick because profits are crumbling," says Michael K. Evans, president of Evans Economics Inc., Washington.
The economy, he noted, moves the market, not vice versa.
On the other hand, Mr. Evans expects the hurricane and the earthquake "to take a hunk out of fourth-quarter GNP." His estimate of 3.3% for third-quarter GNP is higher than the consensus largely because he believes current inventories aren't as low as official figures indicate.
Demand, he believes, is being met from overhang rather than new production. 

By and large, economists believe the two natural catastrophes will limit economic damage to their regions.
Edward J. Campbell, economist at Brown Brothers Harriman & Co., New York, noted that large increases in construction activity along with government and private relief efforts could offset loss of production in those areas. 

Gary Ciminero, economist at Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, Providence, R.I., expects the deflator to rise 3.7%, well below the second quarter's 4.6%, partly because of what he believes will be temporarily better price behavior.
He expects real GNP growth of only 2.1% for the quarter, noting a wider trade deficit, slower capital and government spending and the lower inventory figures. 

Sung Won Sohn, chief economist at Norwest Corp., Minneapolis, holds that the recent stock-market volatility "increases the possibility of economic recession and reinforces the bad news" from recent trade deficit, employment and housing reports. 

The consensus calls for a 0.5% increase in September personal income and a 0.3% gain in consumption.
In August, personal income rose 0.4% and personal consumption increased 0.9%. 

Charles Lieberman, managing director of financial markets reasearch at Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp., New York, said Hurrican Hugo shaved 0.1% to 0.2% from personal-income growth, because of greatly diminished rental income from tourism. 

Durable goods orders for September, due out tomorrow, are expected to show a slip of 1%, compared with August's 3.9% increase.
As usual, estimates on the fickle report are wide, running from a drop of 3.5% to a gain of 1.6%. 

