.START 

Hewlett-Packard Co. will announce today a software program that allows computers in a network to speed up computing tasks by sending the tasks to each other. 

Called Task Broker, the program acts something like an auctioneer among a group of computers wired together.
If a machine has a big computing task, Task Broker asks other computers in the network for "bids" on the job.
It then determines which machine is free to do the task most quickly and sends the task to that machine. 

Hewlett-Packard claims that the software allows a network to run three times as many tasks as conventional networks and will run each task twice as fast. 

The new Hewlett-Packard program, said analyst John McCarthy at Forrester Research Inc., a computer-market research company, "is a key building block as people move to this new model of distributed processing." In today's computer networks, some machines often sit idle while others are overtaxed.
With the Hewlett-Packard program, he said, "You get more bang for the buck you've spent on computers." 

The program, which will be shipped in January 1990, runs on the Unix operating system.
Hewlett-Packard will charge $5,000 for a license covering 10 users.
The program now works on all Hewlett-Packard and Apollo workstations and on computers made by Multiflow Computer Inc. of Branford, Conn.
Hewlett-Packard said it will sell versions later next year that run on Sun Microsystems Inc. and Digital Equipment Corp. machines. 

The Task Broker differs from other programs that spread computing tasks around a network.
A previously available program called Network Computing System, developed by Hewlett-Packard's Apollo division, for instance, takes a task and splits it up into parts, divvying up those parts to several computers in a network for simultaneous processing.
But programs in individual computers must be revised in order to work with that system. 

Applications won't have to be rewritten to work with Task Broker, Hewlett-Packard said, and the user of a computer won't be able to tell that another machine is doing the work.
The Task Broker "turns that network into -- as far as the user is concerned -- one giant computer," said Bill Kay, general manager of Hewlett-Packard's workstation group. 

