.START 

Guillermo Ortiz's Sept. 15 Americas column, "Mexico's Been Bitten by the Privatization Bug," is a refreshingly clear statement of his government's commitment to privatization, and must be welcomed as such by all Americans who wish his country well.
The Mexico-United States Institute is glad to see such a high official as Mexico's undersecretary of finance view his country's reforms "in the context of a larger, world-wide process" of profound change toward free-market economics, especially in the statist countries. 

Having said that, we must caution against an apparent tendency to overstate the case.
It is not quite true, for example, that the Mexican government has "privatized" Mexicana de Aviacion, as Mr. Ortiz claims.
In the same sentence he contradicts himself when he reports that the government still retains 40% of the total equity of the airline.
How can a company be considered "privatized" if the state is so heavily represented in it? (True, the Mexican government has granted "control" over the airline to a new private consortium, but its propensity to take back what it gives is too well known to permit one to be sanguine.) 

Regrettably, too, Mr. Ortiz resorts to the familiar "numbers game" when he boasts that "fewer than 392 {state enterprises} currently remain in the public sector," down from the "1,155 public entities that existed in 1982." But the enterprises still in state hands include the biggest and most economically powerful ones in Mexico; indeed, they virtually constitute the economic infrastructure.
I refer essentially to petroleum, electric power, banking and newsprint. 

Those enterprises, however, are not going to be privatized.
They are officially considered "strategic," and their privatization is prohibited by the Mexican Constitution.
In language that sidesteps the issue, Mr. Ortiz writes, "The divestiture of nonpriority and nonstrategic public enterprises is an essential element of President Carlos Salinas's plan to modernize Mexico's economy. . . ." Yet clearly, modernization must embrace its key industries before it can be said to have caught the "privatization bug." 

The bottom line, however, is not economic but political reform.
A long succession of Mexican presidents arbitrarily nationalized whatever industry they took a fancy to, without having to answer to the public.
To guarantee that Mexicana de Aviacion and other companies will really be privatized, Mexico needs a pluri-party political system that will ensure democracy and hence accountability. 

Daniel James 

President 

Mexico-United States Institute 

Washington 

