.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

MUTUAL FUNDS ARRIVED IN THE U.S. during the Roaring Twenties (they had been in Britain for a century), but they didn't boom until the money market fund was created in the 1970s.
By 1980, there were more than 100 such funds.
Besides creating a vehicle for investors, money market funds also helped rewrite banking regulations. 

The idea was to let small investors, the backbone of the fund business, deal in the money market's high short-term interest rates.
This had been the exclusive province of those rich enough to use six-figure sums to get income that was figured beyond the third or fourth decimal place. 

The now-standard price of $1 a share came about by accident.
An early fund had filed a registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission that included a fixed $1 price.
It arrived just as the regulator handling such operations was retiring.
His successor approved the $1 price in the process of clearing the backed-up papers on his desk.
When Dreyfus started the first advertising-backed retail fund in February 1974, it was priced at $10 a share (and reached $1 billion in assets in one year.) Dreyfus moved to the $1 price after the SEC set standards -- an average 120-day maturity of high-grade paper -- that are still the rule. 

Keeping the listed price at a dollar is primarily a convenience.
Actually, the funds do fluctuate, but beyond the third decimal place.
Rounding-off keeps them at $1. 

Eventually, the money funds' success forced relaxation of curbs on bank interest rates to allow banks to offer competing yields.
The new instrument also introduced many to the industry -- 30% of fund owners (there are more than 54 million accounts) started with a money fund. 

Today more than 470 money market funds have total assets exceeding $350 billion. (The companion tax-exempt funds add $71 billion.) Dreyfus alone has seen its money market funds grow from $1 billion in 1975 to closes to $15 billion today. 

