.START 

In East Germany, where humor has long been the only way to express political criticism, they're not laughing about their new leader Egon Krenz.
Mr. Krenz is such a contradictory figure that nobody has even come up with any good jokes about him. 

"You have to have clear feelings about someone before you can make jokes," says an East German mother of two who loves swapping political barbs with her friends. "With Krenz, we just don't know what to expect." Mr. Krenz doesn't seem to be the knee-jerk hardliner many initially thought he was when the 52-year-old Politburo member was selected last week to succeed Erich Honecker.
But he doesn't appear to be ready to make broad changes either. 

According to East Germany's ADN news agency, Mr. Krenz spoke to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev by telephone over the weekend and acknowledged East Germany could learn from Moscow's glasnost policies.
Already last week, Mr. Krenz started overhauling East Germany's heavily censored and notoriously boring news media.
On Thursday, a day after he took office, East German television broke into regular programming to launch a talk show in which viewers call in questions for a panel of officials to answer.
The regular nightly news program and daily newspapers are also getting a visible injection of Soviet-style glasnost. 

"It was quite a shock," says a 43-year-old East German shopkeeper. "For the first time in my life, I wasn't sure whether I was listening to our news or West German television." 

Other changes, including easing restrictions on travel for East Germans, are expected.
But whether such moves can win back the confidence of East Germans, who have taken to the streets by the thousands in recent weeks to demand democratic changes, depends largely on whether they feel they can trust Mr. Krenz. 

And that's a problem.
Mr. Krenz is not only closely identified with his mentor, Mr. Honecker, but also blamed for ordering violent police action against protesters this month and for praising China for sending tanks against student demonstrators. "I hope he grows with the job," says Rainer Eppelmann, a Protestant pastor in East Berlin. "The most important thing is that he have a chance." 

Although Mr. Krenz is dedicated to East Germany's conservative vein of communism, there is much about his style that sets him apart from his party comrades.
Unlike Mr. Honecker, who tended to lecture people about socialist values, Mr. Krenz enjoys asking questions. 

Indeed, one of his first actions as leader was to visit a gritty machine factory on the outskirts of Berlin and wander among the workers -- a la Gorbachev.
He was later shown on television, fielding questions.
At one point, he asked a worker whether he thought East Germans were fleeing the country because of restrictive travel policies.
The worker's tart reply: "It's more than just travel.
People have a sense the government is ignoring the real problems in our society." The exchange was all the more remarkable in that authorities released television footage to Western news agencies. 

This same tendency toward openness impressed a group of visiting U.S. congressmen this spring.
Rather than trying to "lecture us," says one congressional aide who attended the two-hour meeting, Mr. Krenz "wanted to listen." Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D., Ala.), one of the members of the delegation, says he was particularly impressed by Mr. Krenz's ready admission that East Germany needed to change. 

"He's a very tough man, but one who's also open to arguments," adds an aide to West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. 

But there's another side to Mr. Krenz.
Born in a Baltic town in an area which is now part of Poland, he has dedicated his life to the party apparatus.
He moved quickly through the ranks with the help of his patron, Mr. Honecker, and emerged as the heir apparent. 

Barbara Donovan, an expert on East Germany at Radio Free Europe in Munich, says Mr. Krenz may project a smooth image, but she doubts he's a true reformer.
Even if he is, she adds, he appears to have only limited room for maneuver within the Communist Party's ruling Politburo. 

Against this background, the new East German leader must move quickly to shore up his government's standing.
The sudden growth of the opposition movement, together with the steady outflow of citizens escaping through Poland and Hungary, has plunged the country into its deepest political crisis since an anti-Soviet workers' uprising in 1953. 

"He doesn't have any honeymoon period," says a Western diplomat based in East Berlin. "But if he's sharp and quick, he has a chance." The diplomat adds that Mr. Krenz has several things going for him.
The East German economy is strong compared with other East bloc nations.
And his relative youth could help him project a more vibrant image, contrasting with the perception of Mr. Honecker as an out-of-touch old man. 

For average East Germans, Mr. Krenz remains a puzzle. "Either he wasn't being real in the past, or he isn't being real right now," says a 30-year-old East German doctor. "Either way, I have a problem with how quickly he's changed." 

The doctor was among dozens of people milling through East Berlin's Gethsemane Church Saturday morning.
The walls of the church are covered with leaflets, news clippings, and handwritten notes associated with the country's political opposition. "I have to come here to read the walls," says the doctor, "because it's information I still can't get through the newspapers." 

Meanwhile, East Germany's growing openness may even allow the state-controlled news media to display a muted sense of humor.
Television last week carried a new report on East Berlin's main wallpaper factory and the need to boost production.
East Germans remember a comment a few years ago by Kurt Hager, the government's top ideologist, that just because a neighbor hangs new wallpaper, there's no reason to change your own.
His point was there is no reason for East Germany to copy Soviet-style changes. 

"It's hard to know whether it was intended to be funny," says the East Berlin shopkeeper, "But everyone I know laughed about it." 

