.START 

Health-care companies should get healthier in the third quarter. 

Medical-supply houses are expected to report earnings increases of about 15% on average for the third quarter, despite sales increases of less than 10%, analysts say.
To offset sluggish sales growth, companies have been cutting staff, mostly through attrition, and slowing the growth in research and development spending. 

Sales growth in the quarter was slowed by mounting pressure from groups of buyers, such as hospitals, to hold down prices.
Suppliers were also hurt by the stronger U.S. dollar, which makes sales abroad more difficult.
In some cases, competition has squeezed margins.
Becton, Dickinson & Co., for example, faces stiff competition from a Japanese supplier in the important syringe market.
The Franklin Lakes, N.J., company is expected to report sales growth of only 5% to 6%, but should still maintain earnings growth of 10%, says Jerry E. Fuller, an analyst with Duff & Phelps Inc. 

Among the first of the group to post results, Abbott Laboratories said third-quarter net income jumped 14% to $196 million, or 88 cents a share, from $172 million, or 76 cents a share, a year earlier.
Sales for the company, based in Abbott Park, Ill., rose 8.3% to $1.31 billion from $1.21 billion. 

Baxter International Inc. yesterday reported net climbed 20% in the third period to $102 million, or 34 cents a share, from $85 million, or 28 cents a share, a year earlier.
Sales for the Deerfield, Ill., company rose 5.8% to $1.81 billion from $1.71 billion. 

But not every company expects to report increased earnings.
C.R. Bard Inc. yesterday said third-quarter net plunged 51% to $9.9 million, or 18 cents a share, from $20 million, or 35 cents a share, a year earlier.
Sales fell 1.2% to $190.1 million from $192.5 million.
The Murray Hill, N.J., company said full-year earnings may be off 33 cents a share because the company removed a catheter from the market.
In 1988, the company earned $1.38 a share. 

The Food and Drug Administration had raised questions about the device's design.
Some analysts add that third-party pressures to reduce health costs will continue to bedevil companies' bottom lines.
Takeover speculation, which has been buoying stocks of supply houses, may also ease, says Peter Sidoti, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. "As that wanes, you're going to see the stocks probably wane as well," he says. 

Hospitals companies, meanwhile, are reporting improved earnings. 

Bolstered by strong performances by its psychiatric hospitals, National Medical Enterprises Inc., Los Angeles, reported net income of $50 million, or 65 cents a share, for the first quarter ended Aug. 31, up from $41 million, or 56 cents a share, a year earlier.
Humana Inc., Louisville, Ky., also reported favorable results, with net income of $66.7 million, or 66 cents, in the fourth quarter ended Aug. 31, up from $58.2 million, or 59 cents, a year earlier. 

Analysts say the handful of hospital companies that are still publicly traded are benefiting from several trends.
Most important, hospital admission rates are stabilizing after several years of decline.
Moreover, companies have sold off many of their smaller, less-profitable hospitals and have completed painful restructurings.
Humana's revenues, for example, are being boosted by large increases in enrollments in the company's health maintenance organizations. 

Says Todd Richter, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds: "The shakeout in the publicly traded companies is over." 

