.START 

Colgate Palmolive Co. reported third-quarter net income rose 27%, bolstered by strong sales in its Latin American business and surprisingly healthy profits from U.S. operations. 

Colgate said net income for the quarter rose to $76.7 million, or $1.06 a share, on sales that increased 6% to $1.3 billion.
In the year-earlier period, Colgate posted net income of $60.2 million, or 88 cents a share.
Last year's results included earnings from discontinued operations of $13.1 million, or 19 cents a share. 

Reuben Mark, chairman and chief executive officer of Colgate, said earnings growth was fueled by strong sales in Latin America, the Far East and Europe.
Results were also bolstered by "a very meaningful increase in operating profit at Colgate's U.S. business," he said. 

Operating profit at Colgate's U.S. household products and personal care businesses, which include such well-known brands as Colgate toothpaste and Fab laundry detergent, jumped more than 40%, the company said.
Mr. Mark attributed the improvement to cost savings achieved by consolidating manufacturing operations, blending together two sales organizations and more carefully focusing the company's promotional activities. 

"We've done a lot to improve (U.S.) results and a lot more will be done," Mr. Mark said. "Improving profitability of U.S. operations is an extremely high priority in the company." 

Colgate's results were at the high end of the range of analysts' forecasts.
The scope of the improvement in the U.S. business caught some analysts by surprise.
The company's domestic business, especially its household products division, has performed poorly for years.
Analysts say the earnings improvement came from cutting costs rather than increasing sales. 

For the nine months, net increased 14% to $217.5 million, or $3.09 a share.
Sales rose 7% to $3.8 billion.
The company earned $191.1 million, or $2.79 a share, in the year-earlier period.
Colgate's 1988 net income included $40.1 million, or 59 cents a share, from discontinued operations.
Colgate sold its hospital supply and home health care business last year. 

Separately, Colgate Wednesday finalized an agreement with MacroChem Corp., a tiny dental products and pharmaceutical concern based in Billerica, Mass., to market in the U.S. four of MacroChem's FDA-approved dental products.
The products -- sealants and bonding materials used by dentists -- all contain fluoride that is released over time.
The move is part of a drive to increase Colgate's business with dentists, a company spokeswoman said.
Terms of the agreement weren't given. 

