.START 

The Senate's decision to approve a bare-bones deficit-reduction bill without a capital-gains tax cut still leaves open the possibility of enacting a gains tax reduction this year. 

Late Friday night, the Senate voted 87-7 to approve an estimated $13.5 billion measure that had been stripped of hundreds of provisions that would have widened, rather than narrowed, the federal budget deficit.
Lawmakers drastically streamlined the bill to blunt criticism that it was bloated with special-interest tax breaks and spending increases. 

"We're putting a deficit-reduction bill back in the category of being a deficit-reduction bill," said Senate Budget Committee Chairman James Sasser (D., Tenn.). 

But Senate supporters of the trimmer legislation said that other bills would soon be moving through Congress that could carry some of the measures that had been cast aside, including a capital-gains tax cut.
In addition, the companion deficit-reduction bill already passed by the House includes a capital-gains provision.
House-Senate negotiations are likely to begin at midweek and last for a while. 

"No one can predict exactly what will happen on the House side," said Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.).
But, he added, "I believe Republicans and Democrats will work together to get capital-gains reform this year." 

White House Budget Director Richard Darman told reporters yesterday that the administration wouldn't push to keep the capital-gains cut in the final version of the bill. "We don't need this as a way to get capital gains," he said. 

House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta (D., Calif.) said in an interview, "If that's the signal that comes from the White House, that will help a great deal." 

The Senate's decision was a setback for President Bush and will make approval of a capital-gains tax cut less certain this year.
Opponents of the cut are playing hardball.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) said he was "confident" that any House-Senate agreement on the deficit-reduction legislation wouldn't include a capital-gains tax cut.
And a senior aide to the House Ways and Means Committee, where tax legislation originates, said there aren't any "plans to produce another tax bill that could carry a gains tax cut this year." 

One obvious place to attach a capital-gains tax cut, and perhaps other popular items stripped from the deficit-reduction bill, is the legislation to raise the federal borrowing limit.
Such legislation must be enacted by the end of the month. 

The Senate bill was pared back in an attempt to speed deficit-reduction through Congress.
Because the legislation hasn't been completed, President Bush has until midnight tonight to enact across-the-board spending cuts mandated by the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law. 

Senators hope that the need to avoid those cuts will pressure the House to agree to the streamlined bill.
The House appears reluctant to join the senators.
A key is whether House Republicans are willing to acquiesce to their Senate colleagues' decision to drop many pet provisions. 

"Although I am encouraged by the Senate action," said Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) of the House Ways and Means Committee, "it is uncertain whether a clean bill can be achieved in the upcoming conference with the Senate." 

Another big question hovering over the debate is what President Bush thinks.
He has been resisting a stripped-down bill without a guaranteed vote on his capital-gains tax cut.
But Republican senators saw no way to overcome a procedural hurdle and garner the 60 votes needed to win the capital-gains issue on the floor, so they went ahead with the streamlined bill. 

The Senate bill was stripped of many popular, though revenue-losing, provisions, a number of which are included in the House-passed bill.
These include a child-care initiative and extensions of soon-to-expire tax breaks for low-income housing and research-and-development expenditures.
Also missing from the Senate bill is the House's repeal of a law, called Section 89, that compels companies to give rank-and-file workers comparable health benefits to top paid executives. 

One high-profile provision that was originally in the Senate bill but was cut out because it lost money was the proposal by Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) of the Senate Finance Committee to expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts.
Mr. Bentsen said he hopes the Senate will consider that measure soon. 

To the delight of some doctors, the bill dropped a plan passed by the Finance Committee that would have overhauled the entire physician-reimbursement system under Medicare.
To the detriment of many low-income people, efforts to boost Medicaid funding, especially in rural areas, also were stricken. 

Asked why senators were giving up so much, New Mexico Sen. Pete Domenici, the ranking Republican on the Senate Budget Committee, said, "We're looking like idiots.
Things had just gone too far." 

Sen. Dole said that the move required sacrifice by every senator.
It worked, others said, because there were no exceptions: all revenue-losing provisions were stricken. 

The Senate also dropped a plan by its Finance Committee that would have increased the income threshold beyond which senior citizens have their Social Security benefits reduced.
In addition, the bill dropped a plan to make permanent a 3% excise tax on long-distance telephone calls.
It no longer includes a plan that would have repealed what remains of the completed-contract method of accounting, which is used by military contractors to reduce their tax burden.
It also drops a provision that would have permitted corporations to use excess pension funds to pay health benefits for current retirees. 

Also stricken was a fivefold increase in the maximum Occupational Safety and Health Administration penalties, which would have raised $65 million in fiscal 1990.
A provision that would have made the Social Security Administration an independent agency was excised. 

The approval of the Senate bill was especially sweet for Sen. Mitchell, who had proposed the streamlining.
Mr. Mitchell's relations with Budget Director Darman, who pushed for a capital-gains cut to be added to the measure, have been strained since Mr. Darman chose to bypass the Maine Democrat and deal with other lawmakers earlier this year during a dispute over drug funding in the fiscal 1989 supplemental spending bill. 

The deficit reduction bill contains $5.3 billion in tax increases in fiscal 1990, and $26 billion over five years.
The revenue-raising provisions, which affect mostly corporations, would: 

-- Prevent companies that have made leveraged buy-outs from getting federal tax refunds resulting from losses caused by interest payments on debt issued to finance the buy-outs, effective Aug. 2, 1989. 

-- Require mutual funds to include in their taxable income dividends paid to them on the date that the dividends are declared rather than received, effective the day after the tax bill is enacted. 

-- Close a loophole regarding employee stock ownership plans, effective June 6, 1989, that has been exploited by investment bankers in corporate takeovers.
The measure repeals a 50% exclusion given to banks on the interest from loans used to acquire securities for an ESOP, if the ESOP owns less than 30% of the employer's stock. 

-- Curb junk bonds by ending tax benefits for certain securities, such as zero-coupon bonds, that postpone cash interest payments. 

-- Raise $851 million by suspending for one year an automatic reduction in airport and airway taxes. 

-- Speed up the collection of the payroll tax from large companies, effective August 1990. 

-- Impose a tax on ozone-depleting chemicals, such as those used in air conditioners and in Styrofoam, beginning at $1.10 a pound starting next year. 

-- Withhold income taxes from the paychecks of certain farm workers currently exempt from withholding. 

-- Change the collection of gasoline excise taxes to weekly from semimonthly, effective next year. 

-- Restrict the ability of real estate owners to escape taxes by swapping one piece of property for another instead of selling it for cash. 

-- Increase to $6 a person from $3 the international air-passenger departure tax, and impose a $3-a-person tax on international departures by commercial ships. 

The measure also includes spending cuts and increases in federal fees.
Among its provisions: 

-- Reduction of Medicare spending in fiscal 1990 by some $2.8 billion, in part by curbing increases in reimbursements to physicians.
The plan would impose a brief freeze on physician fees next year. 

-- Removal of the U.S. Postal Service's operating budget from the federal budget, reducing the deficit by $1.77 billion.
A similar provision is in the House version. 

-- Authority for the Federal Aviation Administration to raise $239 million by charging fees for commercial airline-landing rights at New York's LaGuardia and John F. Kennedy International Airports, O'Hare International Airport in Chicago and National Airport in Washington. 

-- Increases in Nuclear Regulatory Commission fees totaling $54 million. 

-- Direction to the U.S. Coast Guard to collect $50 million from users of Coast Guard services. 

-- Raising an additional $43 million by increasing existing Federal Communications Commission fees and penalties and establishing new fees for amateur radio operators, ship stations and mobile radio facilities. 

John E. Yang contributed to this article. 

