.START 

When the price of plastics took off in 1987, Quantum Chemical Corp. went along for the ride. 

The timing of Quantum's chief executive officer, John Hoyt Stookey, appeared to be nothing less than inspired, because he had just increased Quantum's reliance on plastics.
The company outpaced much of the chemical industry as annual profit grew fivefold in two years.
Mr. Stookey said of the boom, "It's going to last a whole lot longer than anybody thinks." 

But now prices have nose-dived and Quantum's profit is plummeting.
Some securities analysts are looking for no better than break-even results from the company for the third quarter, compared with year-earlier profit of $99.8 million, or $3.92 a share, on sales of $724.4 million.
The stock, having lost nearly a quarter of its value since Sept. 1, closed at $34.375 share, down $1.125, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday. 

To a degree, Quantum represents the new times that have arrived for producers of the so-called commodity plastics that pervade modern life.
Having just passed through one of the most profitable periods in their history, these producers now see their prices eroding. 

Pricing cycles, to be sure, are nothing new for plastics producers.
And the financial decline of some looks steep only in comparison with the heady period that is just behind them. "We were all wonderful heroes last year," says an executive at one of Quantum's competitors. "Now we're at the bottom of the heap." 

At Quantum, which is based in New York, the trouble is magnified by the company's heavy dependence on plastics.
Once known as National Distillers & Chemical Corp., the company exited the wine and spirits business and plowed more of its resources into plastics after Mr. Stookey took the chief executive's job in 1986.
Mr. Stookey, 59 years old, declined to be interviewed for this article, but he has consistently argued that over the long haul -- across both the peaks and the troughs of the plastics market -- Quantum will prosper through its new direction. 

Quantum's lot is mostly tied to polyethylene resin, used to make garbage bags, milk jugs, housewares, toys and meat packaging, among other items.
In the U.S. polyethylene market, Quantum has claimed the largest share, about 20%.
But its competitors -- including Dow Chemical Co., Union Carbide Corp. and several oil giants -- have much broader business interests and so are better cushioned against price swings. 

When the price of polyethylene moves a mere penny a pound, Quantum's annual profit fluctuates by about 85 cents a share, provided no other variables are changing.
In recent months the price of polyethylene, even more than that of other commodity plastics, has taken a dive.
Benchmark grades, which still sold for as much as 50 cents a pound last spring, have skidded to between 35 cents and 40 cents. 

Meanwhile, the price of ethylene, the chemical building block of polyethylene, hasn't dropped nearly so fast.
That discrepancy hurts Quantum badly, because its own plants cover only about half of its ethylene needs. 

By many accounts, an early hint of a price rout in the making came at the start of this year.
China, which had been putting in huge orders for polyethylene, abruptly halted them.
Calculating that excess polyethylene would soon be sloshing around the world, other buyers then bet that prices had peaked and so began to draw down inventories rather than order new product. 

Kenneth Mitchell, director of Dow's polyethylene business, says producers were surprised to learn how much inventories had swelled throughout the distribution chain as prices spiraled up. "People were even hoarding bags," he says. 

Now producers hope prices have hit bottom.
They recently announced increases of a few cents a pound to take effect in the next several weeks.
No one knows, however, whether the new posted prices will stick once producers and customers start to haggle. 

One doubter is George Krug, a chemical-industry analyst at Oppenheimer & Co. and a bear on plastics stocks.
Noting others' estimates of when price increases can be sustained, he remarks, "Some say October.
Some say November.
I say 1992." He argues that efforts to firm up prices will be undermined by producers' plans to expand production capacity. 

A quick turnaround is crucial to Quantum because its cash requirements remain heavy.
The company is trying to carry out a three-year, $1.3 billion plant-expansion program started this year.
At the same time, its annual payments on long-term debt will more than double from a year ago to about $240 million, largely because of debt taken on to pay a $50-a-share special dividend earlier this year. 

Quantum described the payout at the time as a way for it to share the bonanza with its holders, because its stock price wasn't reflecting the huge profit increases.
Some analysts saw the payment as an effort also to dispel takeover speculation. 

Whether a cash crunch might eventually force the company to cut its quarterly dividend, raised 36% to 75 cents a share only a year ago, has become a topic of intense speculation on Wall Street since Mr. Stookey deflected dividend questions in a Sept. 29 meeting with analysts. 

Some viewed his response -- that company directors review the dividend regularly -- as nothing more than the standard line from executives.
But others came away thinking he had given something less than his usual straight-from-the-shoulder performance.
In any case, on the day of the meeting, Quantum's shares slid $2.625 to $36.625 in Big Board trading. 

On top of everything else, Quantum confronts a disaster at its plant in Morris, Ill.
After an explosion idled the plant in June, the company progressed in September to within 12 hours of completing the drawn-out process of restarting it.
Then a second explosion occurred.
Two workers died and six remain in the hospital. 

This human toll adds the most painful dimension yet to the sudden change in Quantum's fortunes.
Until this year, the company had been steadily lowering its accident rate and picking up trade-group safety awards. 

A prolonged production halt at the plant could introduce another imponderable into Quantum's financial future.
When a plant has just been running flat out to meet demand, calculating lost profit and thus claims under business-interruption insurance is straightforward.
But the numbers become trickier -- and subject to dickering between insured and insurer -- when demand is shifting. 

"You say you could have sold X percent of this product and Y percent of that," recalls Theodore Semegran, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton who went through this exercise during his former career as a chemical engineer. "And then you still have to negotiate." 

Quantum hopes the Morris plant, where limited production got under way last week, will resume full operation by year's end.
The plant usually accounts for 20% to 25% of Quantum's polyethylene production and 50% of its ethylene production. 

Not everything looks grim for Quantum.
The plant expansion should strengthen the company's sway in the polyethylene business, where market share is often taken through sheer capacity.
By lifting ethylene production, the expansion will also lower the company's raw material costs. 

Quantum is also tightening its grip on its one large business outside chemicals, propane marketing.
Through a venture with its investment banker, First Boston Corp., Quantum completed in August an acquisition of Petrolane Inc. in a transaction valued at $1.18 billion.
Petrolane is the second-largest propane distributor in the U.S.
The largest, Suburban Propane, was already owned by Quantum. 

Still, Quantum has a crisis to get past right now.
Some analysts speculate the weakening stock may yet attract a suitor.
The name surfacing in rumors is British Petroleum Co., which is looking to expand its polyethylene business in the U.S. 

Asked about a bid for Quantum, a BP spokesman says, "We pretty much have a policy of not commenting on rumors, and I think that falls in that category." 

