.START 

As small investors peppered their mutual funds with phone calls over the weekend, big fund managers said they have a strong defense against any wave of withdrawals: cash. 

Unlike the weekend before Black Monday, the funds weren't swamped with heavy withdrawal requests.
And many fund managers have built up cash levels and say they will be buying stock this week. 

At Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest fund company, telephone volume was up sharply, but it was still at just half the level of the weekend preceding Black Monday in 1987.
The Boston firm said stock-fund redemptions were running at less than one-third the level two years ago.
As of yesterday afternoon, the redemptions represented less than 15% of the total cash position of about $2 billion of Fidelity's stock funds. 

"Two years ago there were massive redemption levels over the weekend and a lot of fear around," said C. Bruce Johnstone, who runs Fidelity Investments' $5 billion Equity-Income Fund. "This feels more like a one-shot deal.
People aren't panicking." 

The test may come today.
Friday's stock market sell-off came too late for many investors to act.
Some shareholders have held off until today because any fund exchanges made after Friday's close would take place at today's closing prices.
Stock fund redemptions during the 1987 debacle didn't begin to snowball until after the market opened on Black Monday. 

But fund managers say they're ready.
Many have raised cash levels, which act as a buffer against steep market declines.
Mario Gabelli, for instance, holds cash positions well above 20% in several of his funds.
Windsor Fund's John Neff and Mutual Series' Michael Price said they had raised their cash levels to more than 20% and 30%, respectively, this year. 

Even Peter Lynch, manager of Fidelity's $12.7 billion Magellan Fund, the nation's largest stock fund, built up cash to 7% or $850 million.
One reason is that after two years of monthly net redemptions, the fund posted net inflows of money from investors in August and September. 

"I've let the money build up," Mr. Lynch said, who added that he has had trouble finding stocks he likes. 

Not all funds have raised cash levels, of course.
As a group, stock funds held 10.2% of assets in cash as of August, the latest figures available from the Investment Company Institute.
That was modestly higher than the 8.8% and 9.2% levels in August and September of 1987.
Also, persistent redemptions would force some fund managers to dump stocks to raise cash. 

But a strong level of investor withdrawals is much more unlikely this time around, fund managers said.
A major reason is that investors already have sharply scaled back their purchases of stock funds since Black Monday.
Stock-fund sales have rebounded in recent months, but monthly net purchases are still running at less than half 1987 levels. 

"There's not nearly as much froth," said John Bogle, chairman of Vanguard Group Inc., a big Valley Forge, Pa., fund company. 

Many fund managers argue that now's the time to buy.
Vincent Bajakian, manager of the $1.8 billion Wellington Fund, added to his positions in Bristol-Myers Squibb, Woolworth and Dun & Bradstreet Friday.
And today he'll be looking to buy drug stocks like Eli Lilly, Pfizer and American Home Products whose dividend yields have been bolstered by stock declines. 

Fidelity's Mr. Lynch, for his part, snapped up Southern Co. shares Friday after the stock got hammered.
If the market drops further today, he said he'll be buying blue chips such as Bristol-Myers and Kellogg. "If they croak stocks like that," he said, it presents an opportunity that is "the kind of thing you dream about." 

Major mutual-fund groups said phone calls were arriving at twice the normal weekend pace yesterday.
But most investors were seeking share prices and other information.
Trading volume was only modestly higher than normal. 

Still, fund groups aren't taking any chances.
They hope to avoid the jammed phone lines and other snags that infuriated some fund investors in October 1987. 

Fidelity on Saturday opened its 54 walk-in investor centers across the country.
The centers normally are closed through the weekend.
In addition, East Coast centers will open at 7:30 EDT this morning, instead of the normal 8:30. 

T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. increased its staff of phone representatives to handle investor requests.
The Baltimore-based group noted that some investors moved money from stock funds to money-market funds.
But most investors seemed to be "in an information mode rather than in a transaction mode," said Steven Norwitz, a vice president. 

And Vanguard, among other groups, said it was adding more phone representatives today to help investors get through. 

In an unusual move, several funds moved to calm investors with recordings on their toll-free phone lines. "We view {Friday's} market decline as offering us a buying opportunity as long-term investors," a recording at Gabelli & Co. funds said over the weekend.
The Janus Group had a similar recording for investors. 

Several fund managers expect a rough market this morning before prices stabilize.
Some early selling is likely to stem from investors and portfolio managers who want to lock in this year's fat profits.
Stock funds have averaged a staggering gain of 25% through September, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc. 

Elaine Garzarelli, who runs Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. 's $335 million Sector Analysis Portfolio, predicts the market will open down at least 50 points on technical factors and "some panic selling." But she expects prices to rebound soon and is telling investors she expects the stock market won't decline more than 10% to 15% from recent highs. "This is not a major crash," she said. 

Nevertheless, Ms. Garzarelli said she was swamped with phone calls over the weekend from nervous shareholders. "Half of them are really scared and want to sell," she said, "but I'm trying to talk them out of it." She added, "If they all were bullish, I'd really be upset." 

The backdrop to Friday's slide was markedly different from that of the October 1987 crash, fund managers argue.
Two years ago, unlike today, the dollar was weak, interest rates were rising and the market was very overvalued, they say. 

"From the investors' standpoint, institutions and individuals learned a painful lesson . . . by selling at the lows" on Black Monday, said Stephen Boesel, manager of the $580 million T. Rowe Price Growth and Income Fund.
This time, "I don't think we'll get a panic reaction." 

