.START 

Just when it seemed safe to go back into stocks, Wall Street suffered another severe attack of nerves. 

Does this signal another Black Monday is coming?
Or is this an extraordinary buying opportunity, just like Oct. 19, 1987, eventually turned out to be? 

Here's what several leading market experts and money managers say about Friday's action, what happens next and what investors should do. 

Joseph Granville. "I'm the only one who said there would be an October massacre, all through late August and September," says Mr. Granville, once a widely followed market guru and still a well-known newsletter writer. 

"Everyone will tell you that this time is different from 1987," he says. "Well, in some ways it is different, but technically it is just the same.
If you're a technician, you obey the signals.
Right now they're telling me to get the hell out and stay out.
I see no major support until 2200.
I see a possibility of going to 2200 this month." 

Mr. Granville says he wouldn't even think of buying until at least 600 to 700 stocks have hit 52-week lows; about 100 stocks hit new lows Friday. "Most people," he says, "have no idea what a massacre pattern looks like." 

Elaine Garzarelli.
A quantitative analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., Ms. Garzarelli had warned clients to take their money out of the market before the 1987 crash. 

Friday's big drop, she says, "was not a crash.
This was an October massacre" like those that occurred in 1978 and 1979.
Now, as in those two years, her stock market indicators are positive.
So she thinks the damage will be short-lived and contained. 

"Those corrections lasted one to four weeks and took the market 10%-12% down," she says. "This is exactly the same thing, as far as I'm concerned." Thus, she says, if the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped below 2450, "It would just be a fluke.
My advice is to buy." 

As she calculates it, the average stock now sells for about 12.5 times companies' earnings.
She says that ratio could climb to 14.5, given current interest rates, and still be within the range of "fair value." 

Ned Davis.
Friday's fall marks the start of a bear market, says Mr. Davis, president of Ned Davis Research Inc.
But Mr. Davis, whose views are widely respected by money managers, says he expects no 1987-style crash. 

"There was a unique combination in 1987," he says. "Margin debt was at a record high.
There was tremendous public enthusiasm for stock mutual funds.
The main thing was portfolio insurance," a mechanical trading system intended to protect an investor against losses. "A hundred billion dollars in stock was subject" to it.
In 1987, such selling contributed to a snowball effect. 

Today could even be an up day, Mr. Davis says, if major brokerage firms agree to refrain from program trading.
Over the next several months, though, he says things look bad. 

"I think the market will be heading down into November," he says. "We will probably have a year-end rally, and then go down again.
Sort of a two-step bear market." He expects the downturn to carry the Dow Jones Industrial Average down to around 2000 sometime next year. "That would be a normal bear market," he says. "I guess that's my forecast." 

Leon G. Cooperman. "I don't think the market is going through another October '87.
I don't think that's the case at all," says Mr. Cooperman, a partner at Goldman, Sachs & Co. and chairman of Goldman Sachs Asset Management. 

Mr. Cooperman sees this as a good time to pick up bargains, but he doesn't think there's any need to rush. "I expect the market to open weaker Monday, but then it should find some stability." 

He ticks off several major differences between now and two years ago.
Unlike 1987, interest rates have been falling this year.
Unlike 1987, the dollar has been strong.
And unlike 1987, the economy doesn't appear to be in any danger of overheating. 

But the economy's slower growth this year also means the outlook for corporate profits "isn't good," he says. "So it's a very mixed bag." 

Thus, he concludes, "This is not a good environment to be fully invested" in stocks. "If I had come into Friday on margin or with very little cash in the portfolios, I would not do any buying.
But we came into Friday with a conservative portfolio, so I would look to do some modest buying" on behalf of clients. "We're going to look for some of the better-known companies that got clocked" Friday. 

John Kenneth Galbraith. "This is the latest manifestation of the capacity of the financial community for recurrent insanity," says Mr. Galbraith, an economist. 

"I see this as a reaction to the whole junk bond explosion," he says. "The explosion of junk bonds and takeovers has lodged a lot of insecure securities in the hands of investors and loaded the corporations that are the objects of takeovers or feared takeovers with huge amounts of debt rather than equity.
This has both made investors uneasy and the corporations more vulnerable." 

Nevertheless, he says a depression doesn't appear likely. "There is more resiliency in the economy at large than we commonly suppose," he says. "It takes more error now to have a major depression than back in the Thirties -- much as the financial community and the government may try." 

Mario Gabelli.
New York money manager Mario Gabelli, an expert at spotting takeover candidates, says that takeovers aren't totally gone. 

"Companies are still going to buy companies around the world," he says.
Examples are "Ford looking at Jaguar, BellSouth looking at LIN Broadcasting." These sorts of takeovers don't require junk bonds or big bank loans to finance them, so Mr. Gabelli figures they will continue. 

"The market was up 35% since {President} Bush took office," Mr. Gabelli says, so a correction was to be expected.
He thinks another crash is "unlikely," and says he was "nibbling at" selected stocks during Friday's plunge. 

"Stocks that were thrown out just on an emotional basis are a great opportunity {this} week for guys like me," he says. 

Jim Rogers. "It seems to me that this is the pin that has finally pricked the balloon," says Mr. Rogers, a professor of finance at Columbia University and former co-manager of one of the most successful hedge funds in history, Quantum Fund. 

He sees "economic problems, financial problems" ahead for the U.S., with a fairly strong possibility of a recession. "Friday you couldn't sell dollars," he says.
Dealers "would give you a quote, but then refuse to make the trade." If the dollar stays weak, he says, that will add to inflationary pressures in the U.S. and make it hard for the Federal Reserve Board to ease interest rates very much. 

Mr. Rogers won't decide what to do today until he sees how the London and Tokyo markets go.
He recommends that investors sell takeover-related stocks, but hang on to some other stocks -- especially utilities, which often do well during periods of economic weakness. 

Frank Curzio.
Many people now claim to have predicted the 1987 crash.
Queens newsletter writer Francis X. Curzio actually did it: He stated in writing in September 1987 that the Dow Jones Industrial Average was likely to decline about 500 points the following month. 

Mr. Curzio says what happens now will depend a good deal on the Federal Reserve Board.
If it promptly cuts the discount rate it charges on loans to banks, he says, "That could quiet things down." If not, "We could go to 2200 very soon." 

Frank W. Terrizzi.
Stock prices "would still have to go down some additional amount before we become positive on stocks," says Mr. Terrizzi, president and managing director of Renaissance Investment Management Inc. in Cincinnati. 

Renaissance, which manages about $1.8 billion, drew stiff criticism from many clients earlier this year because it pulled entirely out of stocks at the beginning of the year and thus missed a strong rally. 

Renaissance is keeping its money entirely in cash equivalents, primarily U.S. Treasury bills. "T-bills probably are the right place to be," he says. 

(See related story: "Your Money Matters: Unloading Stocks Worst Step to Take" -- WSJ Oct. 16, 1989) 

