.START 

reminiscent of those during the 1987 crash -- that as stock prices plummeted and trading activity escalated, some phone calls to market makers in over-the-counter stocks went unanswered. 

"We couldn't get dealers to answer their phones," said Robert King, senior vice president of OTC trading at Robinson-Humphrey Co. in Atlanta. "It was {like} the Friday before Black Monday" two years ago. 

Whether unanswered phone calls had any effect or not, Nasdaq stocks sank far less than those on the New York and American exchanges.
Nonetheless, the Nasdaq Composite Index suffered its biggest point decline of the year and its sixth worst ever, diving 14.90, or 3%, to 467.29.
Ten points of the drop occurred during the last 45 minutes of trading.
By comparison, the New York Stock Exchange Composite tumbled 5.8% Friday and the American Stock Exchange Composite fell 4%. 

On Oct. 16, 1987, the Nasdaq Composite fell 16.18 points, or 3.8%, followed by its devastating 46.12-point, or 11% slide, three days later. 

Nasdaq volume Friday totaled 167.7 million shares, which was only the fifth busiest day so far this year.
The single-day record of 288 million shares was set on Oct. 21, 

"There wasn't a lot of volume because it was just impossible to get stock moved," said E.E. "Buzzy" Geduld, president of Herzog, Heine, Geduld, a New York company that makes markets in thousands of OTC issues. 

Most of the complaints about unanswered phone calls came from regional brokers rather than individual investors.
Mr. King of Robinson-Humphrey and others were quick to add that they believe the problem stemmed more from traders' inability to handle the volume of calls, rather than a deliberate attempt to avoid making trades. 

The subject is a sore one for Nasdaq and its market-making companies, which were widely criticized two years ago following complaints from investors who couldn't reach their brokers or trade in the chaos of the crash. 

Peter DaPuzzo, head of retail equity trading at Shearson Lehman Hutton, declared: "It was the last hour of trading on a Friday.
There were too many phones ringing and too many things happening to expect market makers to be as efficient as robots.
It wasn't intentional, we were all busy." 

James Tarantino, head of OTC trading at Hambrecht & Quist in San Francisco, said, "It was just like two years ago.
Everybody was trying to do the same thing at the same time." 

Jeremiah Mullins, the OTC trading chief at Dean Witter Reynolds in New York, said proudly that his company executed every order it received by the close of trading.
But, he added, "you can only take one call at a time." 

Market makers keep supplies of stock on hand to maintain orderly trading when imbalances occur.
On days like Friday, that means they must buy shares from sellers when no one else is willing to.
When selling is so frenzied, prices fall steeply and fast.
Two years ago, faced with the possibility of heavy losses on the stocks in their inventories, market makers themselves began dumping shares, exacerbating the slide in OTC stock prices. 

On Friday, some market makers were selling again, traders said.
But, with profits sagging on Wall Street since the crash, companies have kept smaller share stockpiles on hand. 

Mr. Tarantino of Hambrecht & Quist said some prices fell without trades taking place, as market makers kept dropping the prices at which they would buy shares. "Everyone was hitting everyone else's bid," he said. 

So, while OTC companies incurred losses on Friday, trading officials said the damage wasn't as bad as it was in 1987. "Two years ago we were carrying huge inventories and that was the big culprit.
I don't know of anyone carrying big inventories now," said Mr. King of Robinson-Humphrey. 

Tony Cecin, head of equity trading at Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood in Minneapolis, said that Piper Jaffray actually made money on Friday.
It helped that his inventory is a third smaller now than it was two years ago, he said. 

Joseph Hardiman, president of the National Association of Securities Dealers, which oversees the Nasdaq computerized trading system, said that despite the rush of selling, he never considered the situation an "emergency." 

"The pace of trading was orderly," he said.
Nasdaq's Small Order Execution System "worked beautifully," as did the automated system for larger trades, according to Mr. Hardiman. 

Nevertheless, the shock of another steep plunge in stock prices undoubtedly will shake many investors' confidence.
In the past, the OTC market thrived on a firm base of small-investor participation.
Because Nasdaq's trading volume hasn't returned to pre-crash levels, traders and OTC market officials hope the damage won't be permanent. 

But they are worried. "We were just starting to get the public's confidence back," lamented Mr. Mullins of Dean Witter. 

More troubling is the prospect that the overall collapse in stock prices could permanently erode the base of small-investor support the OTC market was struggling to rebuild in the wake of the October 1987 crash. 

Mr. Cecin of Piper Jaffray says some action from government policy makers would allay investor fears.
It won't take much more to "scare the hell out of retail investors," he says. 

The sellers on Friday came from all corners of the OTC market -- big and small institutional investors, as well as individual investors and market makers.
But grateful traders said the sell orders generally ranged from 20,000 shares to 50,000 shares, compared with blocks of 500,000 shares or more two years ago. 

Shearson's Mr. DaPuzzo said retail investors nervously sold stock Friday and never returned to bargain-hunt.
Institutional investors, which had been selling stock throughout last week to lock in handsome gains made through the third quarter, were calmer. 

"We had a good amount of selling from institutions, but not as much panic," Mr. DaPuzzo said. "If they couldn't sell, some of them put the shares back on the shelf." In addition, he said, some bigger institutional investors placed bids to buy some OTC stocks whose prices were beaten down. 

In addition, Mr. DaPuzzo said computer-guided program selling of OTC stocks in the Russell Index of 2000 small stocks and the Standard & Poor's 500-stock Index sent occasional "waves " through the market. 

Nasdaq's biggest stocks were hammered.
The Nasdaq 100 Index of the largest nonfinancial issues, including the big OTC technology issues, tumbled 4.2%, or 19.76, to 449.33.
The Nasdaq Financial Index of giant insurance and banking stocks dropped 2%, or 9.31, to 462.98. 

The OTC market has only a handful of takeover-related stocks.
But they fell sharply.
McCaw Cellular Communications, for instance, has offered to buy LIN Broadcasting as well as Metromedia's New York City cellular telephone interests, and in a separate transaction, sell certain McCaw properties to Contel Cellular.
McCaw lost 8%, or 3 1/2, to 40.
LIN Broadcasting, dropped 5 1/2, or 5%, to 107 1/2.
The turnover in both issues was roughly normal. 

On a day when negative takeover-related news didn't sit well with investors, Commercial Intertech, a maker of engineered metal parts, said Haas & Partners advised it that it doesn't plan to pursue its previously reported $27.50-a-share bid to buy the company.
Commercial Intertech plummeted 6 to 26. 

The issues of companies with ties to the junk bond market also tumbled Friday.
On the OTC market, First Executive, a big buyer of the high-risk, high-yield issues, slid 2 to 12 1/4. 

Among other OTC issues, Intel, dropped 2 1/8 to 33 7/8; Laidlaw Transportation lost 1 1/8 to 19 1/2; the American depositary receipts of Jaguar were off 1/4 to 10 1/4; MCI Communications slipped 2 1/4 to 43 1/2; Apple Computer fell 3 to 45 3/4 and Nike dropped 2 1/4 to 66 3/4. 

