.START 

On a recent Saturday night, in the midst of West Germany's most popular prime-time show, a contestant bet the host that she could name any of 100 different cheeses after just one nibble, while blindfolded. 

The woman won the bet.
But perhaps even more remarkable, the three-hour-show, "Wetten Dass" (Make a Bet), regularly wins the top slot in the country's TV ratings, sometimes drawing as many as 50% of West German households. 

As the 1992 economic integration approaches, Europe's cultural curators have taken to the ramparts against American "cultural imperialism," threatening to impose quotas against such pop invaders as "Dallas," "Miami Vice" and "L.A.
Law." But much of what the Europeans want to protect seems every bit as cheesy as what they are trying to keep out. 

The most militant opposition to American TV imports has come from French television and movie producers, who have demanded quotas ensuring that a full 60% of Europe's TV shows be produced in Europe.
So far, the French have failed to win enough broad-based support to prevail. 

A glance through the television listings and a few twists of the European television dial suggest one reason why.
While there are some popular action and drama series, few boast the high culture and classy production values one might expect.
More European air time is filled with low-budget game shows, variety hours, movies and talk shows, many of which are authorized knock-offs of their American counterparts. 

One of France's most popular Saturday night programs features semi-celebrities seeking out their grammar-school classmates for on-air reunions.
A Flemish game show has as its host a Belgian pretending to be Italian.
One of Italy's favorite shows, "Fantastico," a tepid variety show, is so popular that viewers clamored to buy a chocolate product, "Cacao Fantastico," whose praises were sung each week by dancing showgirls -- even though the product didn't exist. 

Topping the cheese stunt, on another typical evening of fun on "Wetten Dass," a contestant won a bet with the show's host, Thomas Gottschalk, that he could identify 300 German dialects over the telephone.
A celebrity guest, U.S. Ambassador to West Germany Richard Burt, also won a bet that someone could pile up $150 worth of quarters on a slanted coin.
Mr. Burt nonetheless paid the penalty as if he had lost, agreeing to spend a day with West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher frying and selling their combined weight in potato pancakes. 

If this seems like pretty weak stuff around which to raise the protectionist barriers, it may be because these shows need all the protection they can get.
European programs usually target only their own local audience, and often only a small portion of that.
Mega-hits in Germany or Italy rarely make it even to France or Great Britain, and almost never show up on U.S. screens. 

Attempts to produce "pan-European" programs have generally resulted in disappointment.
One annual co-production, the three-hour-long "Eurovision Song Contest," featuring soft-rock songs from each of 20 European countries, has been described as the world's most boring TV show.
Another, "Jeux Sans Frontieres," where villagers from assorted European countries make fools of themselves performing pointless tasks, is a hit in France.
A U.S.-made imitation under the title "Almost Anything Goes" flopped fast. 

For the most part, what's made here stays here, and for good reason.
The cream of the British crop, the literary dramas that are shown on U.S. public television as "Masterpiece Theater," make up a relatively small part of British air time.
Most British programming is more of an acquired taste.
There is, for instance, "One Man and His Dog," a herding contest among sheep dogs.
Also riveting to the British are hours of dart-throwing championships, even more hours of lawn bowling contests and still more hours of snooker marathons. 

European drama has had better, though still mixed, fortunes.
The most popular such shows focus on narrow national concerns.
A French knock-off of "Dallas," called "Chateauvallon" and set in a French vineyard, had a good run in France, which ended after the female lead was injured in a real-life auto accident. "Schwarzwaldklinik," (Black Forest Clinic), a kind of German "St.
Elsewhere" set in a health spa, is popular in Germany, and has spread into France. 

Italy's most popular series is a drama called "La Piovra," or "The Octopus," which chronicles the fight of an idealistic young investigator in Palermo against the Mafia.
It was front-page news in Italy earlier this year when the fictional inspector was gunned down in the series.
Spain's most popular mini-series this year was "Juncal," the story of an aging bullfighter. 

"The trend is pretty well established now that local programs are the most popular, with American programs second," says Brian Wenham, a former director of programs for the British Broadcasting Corp. "Given a choice, everybody will watch a home-produced show." 

But frequently there isn't much choice.
Thus, Europe has begun the recent crusade to produce more worthy shows of its own, programs with broader appeal. "We've basically got to start from scratch, to train writers and producers to make shows that other people will want to see," concedes Colin Young, head of Britain's National Film Theatre School. 

While some in the U.S. contend that advertising is the bane of television, here many believe that its absence is to blame for the European TV industry's sluggish development.
Until recently, national governments in Europe controlled most of the air time and allowed little or no advertising.
Since production costs were guaranteed, it didn't matter that a program couldn't be sold abroad or put into syndication, as most American programs are.
But not much money was spent on the shows, either, a situation that encouraged cheap-to-make talk and game shows, while discouraging expensive-to-produce dramas. 

Now, however, commercial channels are coming to most European countries, and at the same time, satellite and cable technology is spreading rapidly.
Just last week, Greece authorized two commercial channels for the first time; Spain earlier began to allow commercial television alongside its state channels.
The result is a new and huge appetite for programming. 

But perhaps to the consternation of those calling for quotas, most of this void is likely to be filled with the cheapest and most plentiful programming now available -- reruns -- usually of shows made in the U.S. 

Sky Channel, a British-based venture of Australian-American press tycoon Rupert Murdoch, offers what must be a baffling cultural mix to most of its audience.
The financially struggling station offers programs obviously made available cheaply from its boss's other ventures.
In a Madrid hotel room recently, a viewer caught the end of a badly acted series about a fishing boat on Australia's Great Barrier Reef, only to be urged by the British announcer to "stay tuned for the further adventures of Skippy the Kangaroo." 

Lisa Grishaw-Mueller in Bonn, Laura Colby in Milan, Tim Carrington in London and Carlta Vitzhum in Madrid contributed to this article. 

