.START 

American Medical International Inc. said it hasn't received any other offers to acquire the owner and operator of hospitals, and took another step toward completion of its $3 billion acquisition by IMA Holdings Corp. 

Earlier this month IMA, an investment group that includes Chicago's Pritzker family and First Boston Corp., submitted a reduced bid for American Medical after it couldn't finance its initial offer.
Under the new offer, IMA will pay $26.50 a share for 63 million shares, or about 86% of the shares outstanding.
IMA also will assume $1.4 billion in debt. 

Yesterday, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, AMI common closed at $23.625, up 12.5 cents, on volume of almost 1.8 million. 

Earlier, American Medical said it had been approached again by two other possible suitors, whom it wouldn't identify but who had previously submitted bids for the company.
Yesterday, American Medical said that the two other parties told the company that they don't have any current intention of making a takeover bid. 

American Medical said its directors have approved what is, in effect, a draft of a solvency opinion on the acquisition, submitted by the Los Angeles-based investment banking and evaluation consulting firm of Houlian Lokey Howard & Zukin Inc.
A final opinion must be approved prior to the acceptance of tendered shares for payment under the offer, which was due to expire at 12:01 a.m. EDT today. 

Separately, Moody's Investors Service Inc. downgraded the ratings of American Medical's senior and subordinated debt issues and those of its international affiliate.
The downgrade anticipates completion of the IMA Holdings acquisition today, Moody's said. 

The ratings concern said the acquisition should result in pretax losses from operations because of increases in interest expense and charges for depreciation and amortization, but that it expects the losses to be reduced through productivity gains and above average growth of the company's hospitals.
Moody's said the ratings anticipate a successful debt-reduction program and modest improvement in discretionary cash flow because of planned asset sales. 

Moody's changes affected the following issues: American Medical International: Senior notes, sinking-fund debentures, Euromarket notes, Eurobonds, Swiss franc bonds, unsecured loan stock to Ba3 from Baa2; convertible subordinated debentures, notes, and sinking-fund debentures to B2 from Baa3. 

American Medical International N.V.: Guaranteed Euroissues to Ba3 from Baa2. 

An American Medical spokeswoman said the Moody's downgrading was expected because of the nature of the takeover. 

