.START 

Wall Street would like UAL Corp. 's board to change its mind about keeping the company independent.
But what happens next in the continuing takeover drama may depend more on the company's two most powerful and fractious unions: the pilots and machinists. 

Some people familiar with the situation believe that the collapse of the previous $6.79 billion buy-out, if anything, may have strengthened the hands of these two labor groups.
As a result, both may now have virtual veto power over any UAL transaction. 

One reason: banks -- likely to react to any new UAL deal with even more caution than the first time around -- probably will insist on labor harmony before they agree to put up cash for any new bid or even a less-ambitious recapitalization plan. 

"United pilots have shown on a number of occasions they are willing and able to strike," said an executive at Fuji Bank, one of UAL's large lenders. "If you have both {labor} groups on strike, you've got no revenue and that's a very scary thing for a bank to be looking at." 

Just this past week, a leading Japanese bank asked for a meeting with the machinists' union leaders to determine where the union would stand if another bid or recapitalization became possible. 

Another reason: Emboldened by their success in helping to scuttle the previous transaction, the machinists are likely to be more aggressive if a second buy-out attempt occurs. 

The two unions already had significant leverage simply because their employer has yet to settle with either on new contracts.
That gives them both the threat of a strike and the ability to resist any wage concessions that may be necessary to make a transaction work. 

Thus, even investors who are pushing for the board to do a recapitalization that would pay shareholders a special dividend and possibly grant employees an ownership stake acknowledge that the unions are key. "There's less likelihood of creating and completing a transaction without the unions' cooperation and wage concessions," said Richard Nye, of Baker, Nye Investments, a New York takeover stock-trader.
Mr. Nye thinks the UAL board should be ousted if it doesn't move soon to increase shareholder value. 

Both the pilots and machinists have made it clear that they intend to block any transaction they don't like. "The pilots will be involved in any transaction that takes place around here," pilot union chairman Frederick C. Dubinsky declared yesterday.
But whether the pilots can team up with their longtime adversaries, the machinists, is another question. 

The pilots' Mr. Dubinsky says his union would like majority ownership for employees.
At the very least, the pilots want some form of control over the airline, perhaps through super-majority voting rights. 

On the other hand, the machinists have always opposed majority ownership in principle, saying they don't think employees should be owners. 

Still, in recent days, machinists' union leaders have shown some new flexibility. "We may be able to reach a tradeoff where we can accommodate {the pilot union's} concerns and ours," said Brian M. Freeman, the machinists' financial adviser. 

Mr. Freeman said machinists' union advisers plan to meet this week to try to draw up a blueprint for some form of recapitalization that could include a special dividend for shareholders, an employee stake and, perhaps, an equity investment by a friendly investor. 

If a compromise can't be reached, the pilots maintain they can do a transaction without the support of the machinists.
But at this point, that may just be wishful thinking. 

The machinists lobbied heavily against the original bid from UAL pilots and management for the company.
Their opposition helped scare off some Japanese banks. 

The pilots' insistence on majority ownership also may make the idea of a recapitalization difficult to achieve. "Who wants to be a public shareholder investing in a company controlled by the pilots' union?" asks Candace Browning, an analyst at Wertheim Schroeder & Co. "Who would the board be working for -- the public shareholders or the pilots?" she adds. 

Ms. Browning says she believes a recapitalization involving employee ownership would succeed only if the pilots relent on their demand for control.
She also notes that even if the pilots accept a minority stake now, they still could come back at a later time and try to take control. 

Another possibility is for the pilots' to team up with an outside investor who might try to force the ouster of the board through the solicitation of consents.
In that way, the pilots may be able to force the board to approve a recapitalization that gives employees a majority stake, or to consider the labor-management group's latest proposal. 

The group didn't make a formal offer, but instead told UAL's advisers before the most-recent board meeting that it was working on a bid valued at between $225 and $240 a share.
But again, they may need the help of the machinists. 

"I think the dynamics of this situation are that something's got to happen," said one official familiar with the situation.
The board and UAL's management, he says, "can't go back" to business as usual. "The pilots won't let them." 

