.START 

Former USX Corp. Chairman David M. Roderick may have been lucky he retired last May. 

As he handed over the reins to successor Charles A. Corry, steel profits were close to a cyclical peak.
Though imports were troublesome, they weren't running away with the market, and American companies had high hopes that steel import quotas would be extended for another five years.
Perhaps most important, Carl Icahn, who had once threatened a hostile takeover bid, was subdued.
He and Mr. Roderick were even dining out together. 

Today, Mr. Corry presides over a company whose fortunes have changed abruptly.
Mr. Icahn, the company's deep-pocketed, tenacious adversary, recently disclosed that he had raised his USX stake to 13.1%, and he again threatened a takeover.
A battle with Mr. Icahn would rattle even the most seasoned chief executive, to say nothing of one who took the helm less than five months ago. 

In addition, USX's giant steel segment, representing 34% of its 1988 sales, is facing softening demand and slipping prices as well as increasing competition from foreign steelmakers and low-cost minimills.
The import quotas got only a 2 1/2-year extension, and USX is laboring under a staggering $5.8 billion debt at a time when it must spend money to upgrade steel mills and drill for oil. "It's a baptism of fire for Corry," says one USX executive. 

The burning question is whether the new chief can parry Mr. Icahn without being pushed into unwelcome moves.
Mr. Corry might have to dismember the company more than he wants to.
Or he might have to incur a huge expense of either buying Mr. Icahn's stock, possibly at a premium, or paying stockholders a special dividend partly because of Mr. Icahn's pressure. 

With his recent purchases of USX common stock, Mr. Icahn shattered a three-year-old, unwritten standstill agreement with Mr. Roderick.
In 1986, Mr. Roderick adroitly dodged Mr. Icahn's first bullet after the takeover specialist had built up an 11.4% stake.
Mr. Roderick did so by having USX redeem a series of guaranteed notes, a move that, in effect, raised the cost of a $7.19 billion Icahn bid by about $3 billion.
And he managed to fend off further advances and even strike up an unlikely friendship with the interloper.
Over dinners at New York's Sky Club and Links Club restaurants, the steel executive and the big investor talked steel, international trade and thoroughbred horses. 

Mr. Corry, who has boned up on corporate raiders by reading T. Boone Pickens's autobiography, had hoped the detente would continue.
He was shocked, associates say, to learn of Mr. Icahn's new takeover threat. (Both men declined to be interviewed for this article.) But the fiercely competitive Mr. Corry quickly showed he's no pushover.
He huddled with directors at a special meeting two weeks ago and tried to block his opponent. 

Although the board believed that Mr. Icahn is more interested in talking the stock price higher than acquiring USX, it adopted a poison-pill defense, to be swallowed if anyone amasses a 15% stake. 

Now, it's Mr. Icahn's move.
Will he try to gain a seat on or control of the board and force a radical split of USX into separate oil and steel companies?
Given the weakness of the junk-bond market, can he finance a buy-out?
Mr. Icahn may not want to sell out unless he can get a special dividend similar to one he received before selling his stake in Texaco Inc. in June -- a coup that gave him enough cash to make his USX move. 

And although the recent turmoil in the stock and junk-bond markets, by making it harder to arrange takeover financing, has eased some of the pressure on Mr. Corry, it doesn't end the takeover threat. "I know it's not over," a sober-faced Mr. Corry acknowledged while greeting steel suppliers in New York on Oct. 12 and inviting them to a buffet of salmon and sushi in honor of Kobe Steel Ltd., USX's partner in a steel mill in Lorain, Ohio. 

In fact, it's barely begun for Mr. Corry, who faces tough decisions before he has had a chance to get settled into his new job. "He's in a vulnerable position because he hasn't established much credibility on his own," says Bryan Jacoboski, a securities analyst at PaineWebber Inc. 

The 57-year-old tax attorney never even aspired to the job of chief executive.
An undistinguished college student who dabbled in zoology until he concluded that he couldn't stand cutting up frogs, Mr. Corry wanted to work for a big company "that could do big things." But after joining the tax department of a USX subsidiary 30 years ago, he set the modest goal of becoming tax manager by the age of 46.
For years, he quietly stuck to the back accounting rooms, wearing a hat to work because everyone else did. "I was never a rebel," he said in an earlier interview. "I don't think most of the people that have been around me would ever say they've seen me pound the table or get angry." 

Yet, the unassuming Mr. Corry helped chart USX's transition from Big Steel to Big Oil.
He served as Mr. Roderick's front man in tense negotiations for the 1982 purchase of Marathon Oil for $5.9 billion. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Corry, once named chief executive, didn't waste any time distancing himself from his former boss, who still has an office on the 62nd floor of the USX tower in Pittsburgh.
Soon after taking over last June, Mr. Corry rescinded a pay cut imposed on clerical workers, a move that Mr. Roderick hadn't made in spite of improved earnings.
Mr. Corry also ruled that all board meetings would be held in Pittsburgh instead of New York or Findlay, Ohio, Marathon's home. 

And, earlier this month, he announced the sale of the reserves of Texas Oil & Gas, which was acquired three years ago and hasn't posted any significant operating profits since.
One former executive says, "Nobody wanted that deal inside USX except Dave Roderick," who was a hunting and fishing buddy of William L. Hutchison, chairman of Texas Oil & Gas.
The executive recalls Mr. Corry whispering to him and others, "Remember, this was Dave's deal." 

What miffed many USX executives and shareholders was that the acquisition, for $3 billion of stock, doubled the USX shares outstanding and considerably diluted them.
What's more, the takeover occurred as natural-gas prices were falling and just as Texas Oil & Gas reported its first annual loss in 28 years. 

Mr. Corry expected the Texas Oil & Gas sale to delight Mr. Icahn by addressing his concern about boosting shareholder value.
But when the two men met in New York a day after Mr. Icahn disclosed the rise in his USX stake, Mr. Corry learned that Mr. Icahn wanted him to sell all of Texas Oil -- not just its reserves of about 1.2 trillion cubic feet of natural gas and 28 million barrels of oil but also its pipeline, gas-gathering and contract-drilling operations.
That would leave USX with Marathon, its steel mills and its diversified business segment, which includes, among other things, mineral and transportation products. 

Some speculate that Mr. Corry would agree if he could find a buyer at the right price.
The problem is that Mr. Icahn is pushing him to move faster and further in restructuring USX than Mr. Corry had planned.
Mr. Icahn has long believed, associates say, that the company, whose 1988 sales totaled $16.88 billion, is worth $70 a share if broken up.
The stock closed yesterday at $33.625, giving Mr. Icahn's 33.6 million shares a value of $1.13 billion. 

Mr. Icahn advocates the sale of the company's steel operations, and Mr. Corry doesn't necessarily disagree.
Unlike his predecessor, who saw steel as America's backbone, Mr. Corry tends to view it as a capital-draining and labor-intensive business with limited potential, associates say.
In the past five years, USX has turned steel into a profit maker by closing several plants and reducing labor costs.
But the short-term outlook is so-so. 

It isn't surprising that Messrs. Roderick and Corry view steel so differently.
While Mr. Roderick was reared in the shadows of Pittsburgh's smoking mills, Mr. Corry grew up in Cincinnati, a city nicknamed "Porkapolis" and more accustomed to pork chops than pig iron.
He has never met Lynn Williams, the president of the United Steelworkers union, and isn't active in the industry's main trade group, the American Iron and Steel Institute, which Mr. Roderick served as chairman. 

"Dave thought the country needed a strong U.S. Steel and, while Chuck agreed, he was more apt to say, `Not at any cost to shareholders, '" a former executive says.
Indeed, Mr. Corry, at an August press conference, talked about investing in steel as long as it provides a good return and "not a day longer." 

However, shedding steel would run directly counter to Mr. Roderick's original rationale for diversifying into oil and gas: Having two major products would lessen the company's vulnerability to one market's down cycle and help smooth out the flow of cash and earnings.
As Mr. Roderick once said: "We're a two-product company and, boy, if you can't figure out the value of those two parts, you are so damn dumb that you don't belong on Wall Street." 

Moreover, the opportunity to sell steel at a price acceptable to USX may be gone, for now. "The time has passed for us to spin off steel," either in a public offering or to a buyer, one executive contends.
About the only way that USX now can get out of steel is to dish it out, piece by piece, in separate joint ventures, he adds. 

With Mr. Icahn breathing down his neck, however, Mr. Corry may have little choice but to sell at a weak price, even if it means losing some steel-related tax-loss carryforwards.
That would leave USX essentially an oil company with Marathon as its core.
Marathon has benefited from higher crude-oil prices and strong demand for refined products. 

Oil has long been Mr. Corry's pet.
Indeed, when the Bush administration finally decided this summer to renew import restrictions -- arguably the most important decision to affect the steel industry in five years -- Mr. Corry and his directors were aboard helicopters, high above Marathon's rich oil reserves in the North Sea. 

Should USX be left with only Marathon, Mr. Corry might well feel pushed to scout out other energy companies.
However, even USX executives who work closely with him aren't sure about his long-term goals. "I don't think he has a clear sense of where he wants the company to go," one says.
Right now, the executive adds, "he wants to continue to focus on paying down" USX's debt by selling assets. 

One thing is certain, however: Mr. Corry, while studying other options, probably won't make a major move until he's clear about Mr. Icahn's intentions.
And then, "he won't panic," says J. Bruce Johnston, a former USX executive and now a labor and benefit consultant with Adler Cohen & Grigsby in Pittsburgh. 

Mr. Corry learned presence under fire when, as vice president of corporate planning, he handled what Mr. Johnston calls "don't-con-me" negotiations that led to USX's shedding of a wide array of assets ranging from chemicals to construction. 

When negotiating, Mr. Corry played his cards close to the vest.
Johnnie Johnson, who worked for Mr. Corry in strategic planning, recalls how his boss would routinely ask a subordinate to research an entire industry to target acquisition candidates. "What he really wanted to know was about a particular company, but you didn't know that.
He wanted your own unbiased, virgin opinion," says Mr. Johnson, now managing director at Georgeson & Co., a proxy-solicitation and investor-relations firm. 

Ever the pragmatist, Mr. Corry said in August that he realized that USX is on "acquisition screens all over the country." 

"It's part of the capitalistic market system that equity can be bought and equity is bought," he said.
USX, he noted, was formed 88 years ago, "by in effect buying out a bunch of other companies. . . . People got rich through takeovers in those days, as they do today." 

Thomas F. O'Boyle contributed to this article. 

