.START 

The Democratic-controlled House, by a margin of 51 votes, failed to override President Bush's veto of legislation renewing federal support of Medicaid abortions for poor women who are victims of rape and incest. 

The 231-191 roll call illustrates the limits of power a resurgent abortion-rights movement still faces.
It continues to gain strength in the chamber but remains far short of the two-thirds majority required to prevail over Mr. Bush. 

Democrats voted to override by a 3-1 margin, but Republicans were equally firm in support of the president, who has threatened to make abortion a decisive issue on at least three separate fiscal 1990 spending bills. 

Yesterday's vote dealt with the largest of these bills, an estimated $156.7 billion measure funding the departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services.
To gain more leverage, abortion-rights advocates may seek to fold the bill into an omnibus continuing resolution next month.
But the stark numbers yesterday -- when 282 votes were needed -- indicate the president is in a commanding position for at least this year. "Unless he changes, they lose," said a Democratic leadership aide. 

The action came as Congress sent to the president last night a stopgap spending bill to keep the government operating through Nov. 15 and provide $2.85 billion in emergency funds to assist in the recovery from Hurricane Hugo and the California earthquake.
By a lopsided 97-1 margin, the Senate approved the measure after attaching further provisions sought by the influential California delegation and, despite reservations, the House adopted the bill on a 303-107 roll call. 

The package is more than $1 billion above the recommendations of Budget Director Richard Darman this week.
But given the political importance of California, the administration was content to use its influence to prevent any Senate amendments adding further new appropriations.
The $2.85 billion measure comes on top of $1.1 billion appropriated after Hugo struck the Carolinas and Caribbean last month, and these totals don't reflect the additional benefit of low-interest disaster loans. 

The bill last night includes $500 million to help finance this credit and further raises the obligation ceiling for the Small Business Administration sixfold to $1.8 billion to accommodate the expected loan activity.
In direct cash assistance, $1 billion is provided in federal highway construction funds, and $1.35 billion is divided between general emergency aid and a reserve to be available to the president to meet unanticipated costs from the two disasters. 

In the Senate, Majority Whip Alan Cranston used his position to win not only the expanded credit but also more generous treatment than the House had permitted in the distribution of highway funds in the next six months.
The emergency assistance wouldn't be counted against a state's normal allocation of annual highway funds, and the bill circumvents existing restrictions that otherwise would prevent the use of federal aid to repair a toll road, such as the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge damaged in last week's earthquake. 

The underlying stopgap bill is the second required by Congress this fall and, since the current fiscal year began Oct. 1, only the Energy and Interior departments are operating on permanent appropriations enacted into law.
The standoff over abortion is certain to contribute to further delays and, apart from the health and education measure vetoed by Mr. Bush, bills funding the District of Columbia and the entire U.S. foreign-aid budget are in jeopardy because of related abortion or family-planning issues. 

The vote yesterday was the most partisan in many years, and though the Democratic leadership is ambivalent about how to address the abortion issue, the debate is increasingly measured in party terms.
The 189 Democrats who supported the override yesterday compare with 175 who initially backed the rape-and-incest exemption two weeks ago and 136 last year on a similar vote. 

By comparison, Republicans have held closer to the anti-abortion movement.
Only 42 GOP members opposed the president's veto, a marginal increase over the vote two weeks ago and just 12 more than the 30 who supported the rape-and-incest exemption last year. 

At a recent White House meeting, Rep. Silvio Conte (R., Mass.), the ranking minority member of the House Appropriations Committee, argued with his friend Mr. Bush against a veto, and though Mr. Conte and Minority Leader Robert Michel of Illinois stood with the president yesterday, they are plainly uncomfortable with his position. 

"This isn't a political issue, this is a moral issue," said Rep. Henry Hyde (R., Ill.), the most eloquent spokesman for the anti-abortion movement.
But after years of using the issue for its benefit, the GOP finds its candidates on the defensive.
New Jersey gubernatorial candidate Rep. James Florio pointedly returned from campaigning to vote against the president yesterday in contrast with his opponent, GOP Rep. James Courter, who has ardently supported abortion restrictions in the past but was absent. 

In an extraordinary mix of cultures and church-state powers, Rep. Robert Dornan (R., Calif.) lectured his fellow Roman Catholics -- including Mr. Florio -- for having the "chutzpah" to disagree with the hierarchy of their church on abortion.
Rep. Les AuCoin was as blunt on behalf of the abortion-rights movement. "This may not make George Bush a one-term president," said the Oregon liberal, addressing the Republican side of the House. "But if you support him over rape victims, this may be your last term." 

Separately, the House last night approved a nearly $67 billion compromise spending bill providing the first construction funds for the administration's ambitious space station in fiscal 1990 and incorporating far-reaching provisions affecting the federal mortgage market.
The current ceiling on home loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration would be increased to $124,875, and the bill gives the Department of Housing and Urban Development new authority to facilitate the refinancing of subsidized loans for low-income homeowners. 

By a 325-92 margin, the Appropriations Committee leadership beat back an early challenge by House Banking Chairman Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas) to the FHA provision.
And on a closer 250-170 roll call, lawmakers upheld controversial agreements made by a House-Senate conference earmarking community development funds for more than 40 projects backed by often influential members. 

