.START 

Maxicare Health Plans Inc., operating under Chapter 11 bankrupty-law protection, outlined terms of its reorganization plan that calls for creditors and shareholders to receive at least $78.8 million in cash and $67 million face amount of 10-year, 13.5% notes. 

The plan, outlined in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, also calls for creditors and shareholders to receive common stock and warrants in the new company.
The health-maintenance concern said it reached the agreement with its court-appointed creditors' committees Sept. 28, and intends to submit the plan to the bankruptcy court in November. 

Maxicare, which filed for bankruptcy protection March 16, has total debt of $750 million.
The company has promptly paid all its expenses and obligations since March 16, a Maxicare spokesman said. 

General unsecured creditors of Maxicare's continuing operations initially will receive $47 million in cash, $35 million face amount of senior notes, and 49% of the new company's stock.
Those creditors, whose claims are estimated at about $200 million, include doctors and hospitals. 

General unsecured creditors of Maxicare's discontinued operations, whose claims total $110 million, initially will receive $17.8 million in cash and $10 million in senior notes.
Maxicare's public shareholders will receive 2% of the new company's stock and warrants entitling them to acquire as much as an additional 5% of the stock on a fully-diluted basis. 

General unsecured creditors of the parent holding company initially will receive $14 million in cash, $22 million face amount of senior notes and 49% of the new company's stock.
That group includes banks and bondholders, who have claims of $150 million and $350 million respectively.
Maxicare also will guarantee that the banks will realize at least $7 million on certain notes pledged to them. 

Maxicare said the plan stipulates that enrollees in the company's health plans will have valid claims covered in full.
Those claims, along with priority employee claims, administrative claims, priority tax claims and administrative convenience claims, are expected to total about $16 million. 

The plan is subject to approval by the bankruptcy court and others.
The spokesman said Maxicare hopes to complete the reorganization by early 1990. 

