.START 

House and Senate conferees agreed to continue production of Grumman Corp. 's F-14 and to provide more than $3.8 billion for the Strategic Defense Initiative during the current fiscal year. 

Industry officials and congressional aides said that the main points of a compromise defense authorization bill, hammered out during a flurry of private meetings over the past few days, provide a face-saving compromise for both the White House and House Democrats.
Although conferees are still putting the finishing touches on the package, the final agreement could be announced as early as tomorrow.
An announcement is more likely next week, though. 

President Bush and other supporters of SDI will be able to take credit for blocking House efforts to significantly cut the program to develop a space-based antimissile system, which already has cost some $17 billion.
Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn (D., Ga.) and other Senate conferees have opposed the House cuts, stalling for almost two months action on a number of big-ticket items in the Pentagon's budget. 

The Senate voted to authorize $4.5 billion for SDI spending in the current fiscal year, but the House, reflecting a dramatic erosion of support for the program, earmarked only $3.1 billion.
Despite the widening gap between the two sides, conferees eventually followed the pattern set in previous years by opting to roughly split the difference.
That would hold spending on the program at about the previous year's level. 

The decision to keep the embattled F-14's production line running for at least another year is an important victory for the House, and especially for Rep. Les Aspin (D., Wis.).
As the head of the House conferees, Rep. Aspin has been under intense pressure from his colleagues to reject Senate provisions that would have abruptly cut further F-14 production. 

The package "provides a temporary, golden parachute for Grumman," according to one congressional aide familiar with the closed-door bargaining.
But as part of the overall agreement, Grumman and its outspoken supporters on Capitol Hill effectively will be precluded from reopening the emotional issue in the debate over next year's budget. 

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and most senators contend that the Navy's F-14 is too expensive in an era of shrinking Pentagon budgets.
But the plane boasts a strong core of support in the House, where members are intent on saving Grumman jobs and are worried about potential shortages of carrier-based aircraft by the late 1990s. 

Conferees also agreed to Pentagon requests to earmark a total of nearly $1 billion for work on both mobile MX and Midgetman nuclear missiles, according to congressional aides. 

And lawmakers are putting the finishing touches on a compromise that would give the Air Force nearly all of the $2.4 billion it wants for production of Northrop Corp. 's radar-eluding B-2 bombers, which cost $530 million apiece.
The final B-2 agreement is certain to require detailed testing and verification of the bomber's capabilities, but congressional aides said the accord won't include a House-passed provision that would have withheld production funds until Congress approves a cheaper, scaled-down version of the $70 billion fleet of 132 B-2s envisioned by the Pentagon. 

