.START 

GORBACHEV SAID Moscow won't intervene in East bloc moves to democracy. 

The Kremlin leader, on the first day of a three-day official visit to Helsinki, assured Finland's president that the Soviet Union has "no moral or political right" to interfere with moves toward democracy in Poland, Hungary or elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
In Moscow, the Soviet State Bank announced a 90% devaluation of the ruble against the dollar for private transactions, in an apparent attempt to curb a black market for hard currency.
The action will establish a two-tier exchange rate. 

Workers at six mines in Arctic Circle coal fields called strikes over a series of economic and political demands.
The move defied a law, approved in Moscow this month, banning such walkouts. 

THE HOUSE FAILED to override Bush's veto of a bill easing abortion funding. 

The chamber voted 231-191, 51 votes short of the two-thirds majority needed to overturn the president's veto of legislation renewing support of Medicaid abortions for poor women who are victims of rape and incest.
The roll call was considered an illustration of the limits of power that the resurgent abortion-rights movement faces.
The legislation was part of a $156.7 billion measure funding the departments of Labor, Education, and Health. 

Michigan's Senate passed a bill requiring girls to get parental consent for an abortion and Pennsylvania's House cleared a measure banning abortions after the 24th week of pregnancy. 

The FDA is expected to approve today a program granting access free of charge to the drug AZT for children with AIDS. Adults have had access to the only approved antiviral drug since 1987.
Research shows AZT can relieve dementia and other symptoms in children, 1,859 of whom are known to have been infected. 

Congress sent to Bush a $2.85 billion emergency package to assist in the recovery from last week's California earthquake and from Hurricane Hugo.
The action came after the Senate approved the House-passed measure.
In the San Francisco Bay area, more than 13,000 people were homeless and landslides threatened more houses. 

House-Senate conferees agreed to continue production of Grumman Corp. 's F-14 jet and to provide more than $3.8 billion during the current fiscal year to develop a space-based anti-missile system.
The final package is expected to be announced within the next week. 

The White House has decided to seek changes in pesticide law that are aimed at speeding the removal of harmful chemicals from the food supply.
The changes, which could be announced as early as today, would apply to pesticides and other substances found on fresh and processed foods, officials said. 

East German leader Krenz said he was willing to hold talks with opposition groups pressing for internal changes.
The Communist Party chief, facing what is viewed as the nation's worst unrest in nearly 40 years, also said he would allow East Germans to travel abroad more freely, but made clear that the Berlin Wall would remain. 

A Lebanese Christian alliance accepted an Arab-sponsored proposal aimed at ending Lebanon's 14-year-old civil war.
The move by the coalition of political parties and Lebanon's largest Christian militia isolated military chief Aoun, who has rejected the plan, which includes political changes and a Syrian troop withdrawal from Beirut. 

Baker offered to review Israel's "suggested changes" to his proposal for direct Israeli-Palestinian talks.
But the secretary of state advised Israel that attempting to overhaul the five-point plan risked delaying the negotiations aimed at Mideast peace. 

NATO defense ministers said the 16-nation alliance continues to need a strong nuclear strategy despite political changes in Eastern Europe.
The ministers, concluding a two-day meeting in southern Portugal, welcomed Moscow's pledges to cut its military forces, but urged the Soviets to do more to slash short-range nuclear weapons. 

The Justice Department indicated a possible challenge to a court order allowing former National Security Adviser Poindexter to subpoena ex-President Reagan's personal papers for use in the defense case against Iran-Contra charges.
A department spokesman said the ruling "raised a serious question" about the office of the president. 

Bush said Washington would continue a trade embargo against Nicaragua, declaring that the Central American country poses "an unusual and extraordinary threat" to the security of the U.S. Meanwhile, Secretary of State Baker said the U.S. protested to Moscow over shipments of East bloc arms to Salvadoran rebels from Managua. 

A landslide engulfed a hillside slum in Sao Paulo, Brazil, and at least 20 people, most of them children, were missing and feared dead.
The city's mayor vowed to take legal action against developers who had been excavating at the crest of the hill. 

Czechoslovakia's premier said he supports broad political and economic restructuring, but ruled out any dialogue between Prague's Communist government and independent human-rights or dissident groups.
Ladislav Adamec, ending a two-day visit to Austria, pledged changes in Czechoslovakia, including freer travel to the West. 

Died: Mary McCarthy, 77, novelist and literary critic, in New York City, of cancer. . . . Marion Harper, 73, founder and ex-chief executive of Interpublic Group of Cos., in Oklahoma City, of a heart attack. 

