.START 

Comments by Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan lent some support to the dollar, but the U.S. unit ended yesterday lower against most major currencies. 

Foreign-exchange dealers noted that the impact of the chairman's remarks was slight and warned that the currency remains sensitive to developments on Wall Street. 

Traders said that Mr. Greenspan, whose statements are ordinarily cautious, was especially careful to avoid any jarring proclamations, with fears about equities still unnerving financial markets. 

Testifying before a panel of the House Banking Committee, Mr. Greenspan said the short-term value of the dollar on foreign-exchange markets isn't the primary policy focus of the central bank. 

"Our essential focus is on domestic policy," Mr. Greenspan said, referring to the goals of price stability and a stable economy. 

In perhaps his most telling remark, Mr. Greenspan termed the current U.S. inflation rate of around 4.5% as "much too high to be ignored." 

He added, however, that inflation could be brought down "close to zero" without throwing the economy into a recession. 

Analysts viewed the chairman's comments as an indication that the central bank is disinclined to ease monetary policy further in the near future. 

The dollar climbed immediately higher on news of Mr. Greenspan's testimony, settling lower in later trade as dealers squared positions ahead of today's preliminary report on third-quarter U.S. gross national product. 

In late New York trading yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8353 marks, down from 1.8355 marks Tuesday, and at 141.52 yen, up from 141.45 yen late Tuesday.
Sterling was quoted at $1.6145, up from $1.6055 late Tuesday. 

In Tokyo Thursday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.60 yen, up from Wednesday's Tokyo close of 141.55 yen. 

Many traders forecast a continuation of the market's recent bearish trend and predict the U.S. currency will remain stuck in its relatively narrow ranges in the near term and then shift lower. 

But according to Doug Madison, a corporate trader with Bank of America in Los Angeles, a large number of short positions must first be corrected, spurring a temporary upswing, before the unit can turn lower. 

He predicts a downward move in dollar-mark trade and a less dramatic slip in dollar-yen, noting that there continues to be a large pool of Japanese investor interest in U.S. securities, which could provide a solid base for the dollar at around 140 yen. 

Market participants hope today's GNP report will offer more substantial evidence on U.S. economic growth, although analysts are quick to point out that the figures may overstate the economy's vigor. 

"The `r' word is looming again," says one dealer, referring to persistent concern among some market analysts that the U.S. economy is heading toward a major slowdown if not a recession. 

Some dealers note that while the third-quarter figures may appear relatively bullish -- the market consensus calls for a 2.5% annual growth rate, unchanged from the second-quarter rate -- it would take a significantly stronger figure to alter market perceptions that the economy is softening. 

Some analysts reckon that the next quarter's figures will present a more accurate picture of the U.S. economy, showing a marked slowdown in a number of sectors, including housing starts and equities. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $369.10 an ounce, down $1.10.
Estimated volume was a light 1.7 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Thursday, gold was quoted at $368.24 an ounce. 

