.START 

ITT Corp., its insurance business hurt by Hurricane Hugo, reported a 4% decline in third-quarter net income, despite a 4.2% rise in revenue. 

ITT also forecast a fourth-quarter blow to earnings from the California earthquake.
Except for insurance, however, ITT said it expects improved operating earnings "in all of our businesses for the full year." 

Third-quarter net income dropped to $221 million, or $1.55 a share, from $230 million, or $1.60 a share, in the year-earlier period.
ITT bought back 8.8 million shares this year, including 2.8 million during the third quarter. 

Third-quarter revenue rose to $4.9 billion from $4.7 billion. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, ITT common stock fell 62.5 cents to close at $58.75 a share. 

In addition to insurance and finance, ITT has interests in electronic parts, defense technology, automotive parts, fluid technology, pulp and timber, and communications and information services. 

"Hurricane Hugo losses and the continuing industrywide downturn in the property and casualty insurance business were the major factors affecting quarterly comparisons," said Rand V. Araskog, chairman and chief executive officer. 

ITT's Hartford Insurance Group had a $53 million quarterly pretax loss from Hurricane Hugo, ITT said.
Hartford expects to report a further pretax loss of about $30 million for the current quarter, as a result of the California earthquake this month, ITT added. 

The company also disclosed its financial operations had increased reserves for bankrupt accounts, resulting in a $40 million pretax charge for the third quarter.
This charge was partly offset, however, by $19 million in pretax capital gains. 

ITT also said its consumer finance unit agreed in September to settle a civil suit with the California attorney general over alleged improper lending and sales practices.
Anticipating this settlement, the company recorded a pretax charge of $24 million during the fourth quarter of 1988.
An ITT spokesman said the charge wasn't publicly reported at the time. 

"The company's product businesses, with the exception of electronic components, had higher operating earnings for the first nine months of 1989," the company said.
Elaborating on the exception, it said volume and margins were lower in semiconductor and power systems operations. 

