.START 

After coming close to a partial settlement a year ago, shareholders who filed civil suits against Ivan F. Boesky and the partnerships he once controlled again are approaching an accord, people familiar with the case said. 

Meanwhile, within the next few weeks, the limited partners in Ivan F. Boesky & Co. L.P. are expected to reach a partial settlement with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. regarding the distribution of the $330 million in partnership assets, said one of the individuals.
Under the terms of the settlement, the limited partners would drop their civil suits against Drexel, now pending in federal court in New York, another individual said. 

Attorneys involved in the talks said that the parties were closer to accord than they were a year ago, when reports of an imminent agreement circulated.
One individual said the shareholders' accord was "well worked out." 

However, less optimistic attorneys warned that because of the tangle of numerous defendants and plaintiffs with overlapping claims, there is always the possibility that the talks will again fall apart. 

A shareholders' accord would provide the first restitution to thousands of individuals and institutions claiming losses as a result of insider trading by Boesky & Co., once the largest arbitrage fund in the U.S.
The plaintiffs are investors who bought and sold securities in which Mr. Boesky and his partnerships were dealing.
Some claim they suffered losses because they sold while he was buying and others because they bought while he was selling. 

Stocks involved in the shareholder suits include Union Carbide, RJR Nabisco, American Natural Resources, Boise Cascade Corp., General Foods Corp., Houston Natural Gas and FMC Corp. 

There are at least 27 class-action shareholder suits that have been consolidated in federal court in New York under U.S. District Judge Milton Pollack.
Among the defendants are Mr. Boesky; the now-defunct Ivan F. Boesky & Co.; Mr. Boesky's main underwriter, Drexel Burnham; and Cambrian & General Securities PLC, a British investment fund once controlled by Mr. Boesky. 

Individuals familiar with the negotiations said the partial settlement being negotiated would remove the Boesky partnership, the British fund and Mr. Boesky as defendants, while Drexel and other defendants would remain. 

Charles Davidow, of the Washington, D.C.-based law firm Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering, which represents Mr. Boesky in this matter, said only that "discussions are under way.
There are no agreements yet." 

It has been three years since Mr. Boesky, now in prison, agreed to pay a $100 million fine to settle the government's charges that he had traded illegally using insider information.
Out of this, the government set up a $50 million fund for plaintiffs who can prove their financial losses.
According to William Orbe, an attorney at Grais & Richards, the escrow agents for the fund, as of Sept. 30 the fund amounted to $60.5 million. 

Separately, attorneys for the 42 or so limited partners have had serious discussions that could lead to the distribution of the partnership's assets.
The limited partners include insurance companies, financial institutions and individual investors. 

An agreement with Drexel regarding the limited partners' investments is an essential step toward getting their money back.
This is because a Delaware court earlier this year said that Drexel is entitled to get its money back before or at the same time as the limited partners.
Drexel is owed $20 million by the partnership. 

An individual familiar with the negotiations said that whatever investments the limited partners do not recoup from the $330 million in partnership assets, they will receive from the $350 million restitution fund available as a result of Drexel's settlement with the government in December 1988. 

Drexel agreed to plead guilty to six felony counts and pay $650 million, of which $350 million was set aside for shareholders and other plaintiffs, including the limited partners, who claim they were injured by Drexel. 

JAILED AFRICAN-AMERICAN activist wins a battle against the 

U.S. District Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. ordered the FBI to immediately begin processing Herman Benjamin Ferguson's request for documents stemming from the agency's investigation of him during the 1960s.
The FBI had said it would not be able to begin processing the request until June 

Mr. Ferguson, who is 68 years old, fled the U.S. in 1970 after exhausting his appeals of a 1968 conviction on conspiracy to murder.
He turned himself in to authorities in New York earlier this year.
He maintains that the information from the FBI will help him get his 1968 conviction vacated and his bail-jumping indictment dismissed.
His attorneys claim he was framed by the FBI and New York police as part of a campaign to destroy the black liberation movement of the 1960s. 

Because the federal Freedom of Information Act wasn't law at that time, the FBI wasn't required to turn over information on its investigations when Mr. Ferguson appealed his conviction in the 1960s.
But in federal court in Manhattan, Judge Patterson said the FBI records could show that Mr. Ferguson's arrest was the result of questionable legal practices. 

The judge said that if the FBI's proposed schedule was followed in releasing the documents, "a delay of over one year will have occurred and plaintiff will have served approximately two-thirds of his 3 1/2-year minimum sentence by the time he receives the files." 

Gabriel W. Gorenstein, the assistant U.S. attorney handling the case for the FBI, said no decision has been made about appealing the judge's ruling. 

FEDERAL COURTS URGED to cut costs and reduce delays of civil suits. 

The study, conducted by a task force of the Brookings Institution, suggests that Congress should require the courts to develop the plans.
The study was initiated by Senate Judiciary Committee chairman Joseph Biden (D., Del.). 

The Washington, D.C., think tank recommends that the courts adopt different "tracks" for different types of civil cases in order to separate the handling of highly complex suits from simpler ones.
Complex cases, such as antitrust suits and many business disputes, would receive intense supervision by federal judges to keep pretrial proceedings moving.
Standard cases would require less judicial attention, and fast-track cases could be resolved quickly. 

The study also said each federal court should set strict time limits for the pretrial exchange of documents and evidence, ranging from as much as 100 days for cases in the fast track to as much as 18 months for complex disputes.
And the study said federal courts should set firm trial dates early in the process. 

To take advantage of local expertise and custom, the study said, Congress should require each of the 94 federal district courts to adopt its own plan to speed the handling of civil suits and to reduce the high costs in civil cases. 

Although some of the study's recommendations resemble those of similar projects, the makeup of the task force was unusually diverse, adding significance to the effort.
It included lawyers from civil rights and consumer groups, plaintiffs' lawyers and defense attorneys, corporate counsel and law professors. 

