.START 

Delmed Inc. 's top two officers resigned and were succeeded by executives of Fresenius USA Inc. and its parent, Fresenius AG, a major Delmed holder that has been negotiating to acquire a controlling stake. 

In addition, Delmed, which makes and sells a dialysis solution used in treating kidney diseases, said negotiations about pricing had collapsed between it and a major distributor, National Medical Care Inc. 

Delmed said Robert S. Ehrlich resigned as chairman, president and chief executive.
Mr. Ehrlich will continue as a director and a consultant.
Leslie I. Shapiro, chief operating officer and chief financial officer, also resigned, the company said. 

Mr. Ehrlich was succeeded as chairman by Gerd Krick, a director of Fresenius, a West German pharmaceutical concern.
Ben Lipps, president of Fresenius USA, was named president, chief executive and chief operating officer. 

None of the officials was available for comment. 

In trading on the American Stock Exchange, Delmed closed at 50 cents, down 6.25 cents. 

Fresenius owns about 42% of Delmed's fully diluted common stock.
The two companies have been discussing a transaction under which Fresenius would buy Delmed stock for cash to bring its beneficial ownership to between 70% and 80% of Delmed's fully diluted common stock.
The transaction also would combine Fresenius USA and Delmed. 

Under the proposal, Delmed would issue about 123.5 million additional Delmed common shares to Fresenius at an average price of about 65 cents a share, though under no circumstances more than 75 cents a share. 

Yesterday, Delmed said it "continues to explore the possibility of a combination with Fresenius USA." It added that it is apparent that any terms of a combination "would be substantially less favorable than those previously announced." 

While the discussions between Delmed and National Medical Care have been discontinued, Delmed will continue to supply dialysis products through National Medical after their exclusive agreement ends in March 1990, Delmed said.
In addition, Delmed is exploring distribution arrangements with Fresenius USA, Delmed said. 

