.START 

West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, seemed tethered again yesterday in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Widely expected to open 10 to 15 cents a barrel higher on the strength of statistics from the American Petroleum Institute, the December contract managed to start the session only eight cents higher. 

In the last hour of the trading day, December contract took a tumble to end the session 10 cents lower at $19.62 a barrel.
And now that the price has fallen below $19.65, which many had said showed considerable resistance, some traders and analysts figure there's little to stop the price from going lower on technical decisions. 

With no petroleum-related news or changes in the fundamentals to dictate price moves, "technicians are wanting to sell this stuff," said Eric Bolling of Edge Trading Corp. "And short-term, the technicians may have their way." 

The market quickly discounted the weekly inventory report showing a 6.3 million barrel decrease in U.S. crude oil stocks as the legacy of Hurricane Jerry.
That storm hit the Gulf Coast Oct. 13, closing the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port for a time and preventing tankers from unloading.
Next week's report could very well show an increase in crude inventories. 

Dismissing the trade group's numbers left traders plenty of time to worry anew about the latest reports on OPEC production.
An AP-Dow Jones survey of integrated oil companies, independent refiners, and oil industry consultants indicates that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries increased its production to 22.2 million barrels a day in September.
Estimates suggest October's figure may be even higher. 

That level of production isn't of much concern as long as demand continues strong, analysts said.
But the first quarter of the year is generally the weakest and OPEC production doesn't seem to be slackening in anticipation of that.
Also, maintaining current demand assumes no significant slowdown in world economies. 

To top off the bearish factors affecting yesterday's trading, late October weather, especially in the Northeast U.S., continues to be very moderate, leaving heating oil futures trading lackluster. "We aren't seeing any cold weather here," Mr. Bolling said from New York. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean and corn futures prices moved higher on the strength of buying from commodity pool managers trying to profit from technical price trends, as well as continued export strength.
A leveling off of farmer selling tied to the harvest also removed some of the downward pressure on futures contract prices.
Wheat futures prices fell, however, at least partly in reaction to the rumored selling of futures contracts equal to several million bushels of wheat by commodity speculator Richard Dennis.
Neither Mr. Dennis nor officials of his Chicago trading company, C&D Commodities, could be reached for comment.
As for corn and soybean futures, "a lot of commission house buying this morning and computer-driven buying" supported prices in early trading, said Steven Freed, a futures analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Chicago.
Soybean futures for November delivery gained 5.25 cents a bushel to close at $5.66 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade.
December corn futures added 2.25 cents a bushel to close at $2.4225 a bushel on the Board of Trade.
Announced and anticipated purchases from foreign countries are also supporting futures prices. "Russian ships are arriving in the gulf and there isn't enough grain in the pipeline," said Katharina Zimmer, a futures analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co. in New York.
The Soviet Union has purchased roughly eight million tons of grain this month, and is expected to take delivery by year end, analysts said. 

COTTON: Futures prices rose modestly, but trading volume wasn't very heavy.
The December contract settled at 73.97 cents a pound, up 0.59 cent, but it rose as high as 74.20 cents.
Several cotton analysts said that the move appeared to be mostly technical.
Traders who had sold contracts earlier, in hopes of buying them back at lower prices, yesterday were buying contracts back at higher prices to limit their losses.
Floor traders also said that the market could have been helped by rumors, which have been circulating for the past two days, about China purchasing cotton.
The rumor, which has been neither confirmed nor denied, has China buying 125,000 to 200,000 bales for near-term delivery.
One floor trader said that if there were Chinese purchases, they should have had a bigger effect on the market.
Another said that if China was a buyer, it would be the earliest that country had made purchases since the 1979-80 crop year, and thus would be a bullish sign.
This trader characterized the recent price action as a contest between the fundamentalists, who see higher prices ahead, and the technicians, who are basically buying cotton toward the bottom of the current trading range, around 71 cents, and selling it when the price climbs more than 74 cents.
This trader said that he thought the market would turn aggressively bullish from a technical standpoint if the December contract was able to exceed 75.75 cents.
He also noted that stocks on Aug. 1, 1990, are currently projected at 3.3 million bales, the smallest end-of-season supply since 1985. 

COCOA: The modest sell-off, which started on Tuesday, continued.
The December contract ended at $999 a metric ton, down $15.
The market is drifting, at least partly, because of a lack of crop information out of Ghana and the Ivory Coast, the two largest African producers.
Harry Schwartz, a soft commodity specialist for Cargill Investors Services in New York, said the only report Ghana has issued about the arrival of cocoa from the interior was for 7,839 metric tons as of Oct. 12. By this time last year, he noted, arrivals totaling 33,270 tons had been announced.
A similar situation apparently exists in the Ivory Coast with no figures released yet this year, compared with 55,000 tons as of this time a year ago.
He said that if little cocoa actually has arrived at the ports, shipping delays could result.
This is the worry that probably brought steadiness to the market earlier in the week, he said.
There was also some fear that without Ivory Coast cocoa a large French cocoa merchant, Cie. Financiere Sucre et Denrees, might not be able to deliver cocoa against the contracts it had sold earlier for December delivery in London.
However, the French merchant has about 200,000 tons of old crop Ivory Coast cocoa stored in the Netherlands from an agreement it had negotiated with the Ivory Coast last spring.
Cargill thinks that even though the merchant has a contract stating that it won't bring this cocoa to market until after March 1991, there is some evidence the contract has been modified.
This modification, apparently, would permit the French merchant to deliver this cocoa, if necessary, against existing short positions. 

