.START 

The bad news in the junk bond market yesterday was that TW Services, a group of restaurant chains, became the latest prospective issuer to get a cold shoulder from bond buyers. 

The good news -- to fans of stable credit, at least -- is what the rejection says about the state of mind of junk buyers.
Apparently they are learning to say no to excess risk. 

Coniston Partners, which with related entities controls 80% of TW, had been planning to sell $1.15 billion of junk bonds, among other things to finance their acquisition of the remaining public shares. 

But Coniston, a New York partnership managed by the firm of Gollust, Tierney & Oliver, yesterday announced that "in view of unsettled conditions in securities markets" the offering would be postponed and restructured.
What wasn't mentioned is that Coniston and its investment banker, Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, just completed a two-week "road show" for the purpose of marketing the bonds.
And investors, at least for now, took a pass. 

TW's junk bonds weren't, as junk bonds go, unusually weak.
Its fast-food restaurants -- including Denny's, Hardee's, Quincy's and El Pollo Loco ("the only significant fast-food chain to specialize in char-broiled chicken") -- are stable, recession-resistant and growing.
But unless they continued to grow, TW, based in Paramus, N.J., would have run into trouble. 

Until recently, such buy-now, pray-for-growth-later deals were routine. "But people don't buy anything on expectation anymore," says Jack Utter, who manages the high-yield fund of IDS Financial Services. "Investors," he adds, "are getting religion." The TW buy-out may yet be financed. "There is nothing wrong with the company," says Coniston principal Paul Tierney.
The rub, he says, is that "the junk market isn't as deep" as before.
TW's stockholder meeting was postponed from tomorrow to Nov. 21.
By then, DLJ hopes to be able to sell less-junky junk bonds. 

Gollust, Tierney & Oliver is likely to contribute more than the $120 million in equity it had planned on.
Banks may contribute more senior debt.
And the total amount of junk financing will be reduced. 

A DLJ banker, putting a best possible face on it, asserts that "very few people said they didn't like the credit quality.
People said they didn't think a billion-dollar deal would trade." 

But trading risk stems from credit risk.
And by adding equity, DLJ would seem to be acknowledging that credit risk was a concern.
Indeed, the DLJ banker says, in the reborn capital structure cash coverage of interest "will meaningfully improve." As he sums it up: "We are listening to the market." 

What is it, to borrow a term from Coniston, that so unsettled the market?
Some of the same risks that were cited -- and seemingly ignored -- in dozens of previous junk offerings. 

The TW prospectus says that if the acquisition had been completed earlier, pretax earnings "would have been insufficient to cover its fixed charges, including interest on debt securities," by approximately $62.7 million in the first six months of 1989.
TW notes, as many junk issuers do, that "adjusted to eliminate non-cash charges" TW would have run a cash surplus -- in this case, of $56 million over six months. 

But such calculations ignore the noncash charge of depreciation, taken to allow for the gradual wearing out of french friers, deterioration of stores and the like.
In fact, DLJ says, the company envisions capital expenses of about $180 million a year. 

TW's pitch was that sales and earnings at its restaurants have risen steadily and that people won't stop eating during a downturn.
But they won't necessarily eat at Denny's.
The fast-food business is "intensely competitive," notes Wertheim Schroder analyst John Rohs.
Prospective bond buyers noted that TW historically has prospered because it has been willing to spend aggressively on remodeling restaurants and redoing menus. 

"We were concerned that they weren't going to generate enough cash for capital spending and also to pay down debt," says a big investor in high-yield debt.
DLJ argues that TW could, if necessary, cut capital spending, since half of what it plans to spend is for "growth," rather than maintenance.
But investors noted that under the shelved offering, TW would have needed to grow to meet its debt payments.
Its calculations for meeting cash charges ignore $52 million a year in interest on cash-deferred, or zero-coupon debentures -- which ultimately would have had to be paid. 

The prospectus notes "there can be no assurance" that future growth will continue at past levels.
In the recent past, bond buyers didn't seek such assurance.
Now, apparently, they do. 

TW Services 

(NYSE; Symbol: TW) 

Business: Restaurants 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988* 

Revenue: $3.57 billion 

Net Income: $66.9 million; $1.36 a share** 

Third quarter, Sept. 30, 1989: 

(Net Loss: 7 cents share) vs. net income: 

51 cents a share 

Average daily trading volume: 

179,032 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 49 million 

*Includes results of Denny's Inc., acquired in September 

**Includes $9 million write-down of assets and takeover defense costs. 

