.START 

At a time when Jon Levy should be planning the biggest spring season in his dress company's 17 years, his work day is studded with intense moments of concern about one of his biggest customers, Campeau Corp. 

"The dress business has always been a gamble, but it's never been like this," says Mr. Levy, president of St. Gillian Group Ltd., which has become a hot name thanks to a campaign of sexy TV commercials. 

Every day, Mr. Levy checks orders from Campeau department store chains, trying to guess if he will be paid. "I'm now monitoring every major account." 

Campeau, owner of such retailers as Bloomingdale's, Bon Marche, and Jordan Marsh, sidestepped financial collapse last month after an emergency $250 million loan from Olympia & York Developments Ltd., a Canadian developer and a major shareholder in Campeau.
The need for the loan surprised many analysts and bond holders who had been told at the company's annual meeting in July that there weren't any major problems ahead. 

The risk of doing business with Campeau's Federated and Allied department store chains is about to increase greatly, not only for Mr. Levy but for hundreds of other small apparel makers, button suppliers, trucking firms and fabric houses. 

Next week, the country's top designers and manufacturers will begin showing fashions for spring 1990, the second most important selling season of the year.
And as the applause dies down in showrooms along Seventh Avenue and Broadway, stylishly clad Campeau buyers will begin writing orders. 

Orders from Campeau retailers used to be cause for celebration.
This is no longer true because of Campeau's massive debt load. 

"It's all anybody wants to talk about," says Richard Posner, executive vice president for Credit Exchange Inc., a leading credit service. "People wonder what's going to happen next." 

Many manufacturers are worried about being paid for merchandise already shipped to Campeau stores.
But those dollars at risk pale in comparison to the investment required to make and ship spring goods to Campeau stores. 

"The few million dollars I could lose today is nothing against what I could lose on the spring line," says Mr. Levy, who estimates that Campeau stores will sell $25 million worth of his clothes this year. "I'm buying fabric right now for clothes which I may not be paid for until April or May.
What happens to me if Campeau collapses between now and then?" 

Some credit concerns, such as Bernard Sands Credit Consultants Inc., have told clients not to ship anything to Federated or Allied stores on credit. "This is especially true for spring merchandise," says Jim Rindos, credit manager at Bernard Sands. "Campeau has too much debt." 

Other credit houses, such as Credit Exchange and Solo Credit Service Corp., are suggesting that their clients study each order before shipping. "Payments are good right now, but we aren't recommending any long-term lines of credit," says Richard Hastings, a retail credit analyst, referring to credit lines which make inventory purchases automatic. "The Campeau situation is a little uncertain and very difficult to analyze." 

Because of those concerns, some manufacturers say they will ask for letters of credit before shipping spring merchandise. "We're being paid today, but we're worried about tomorrow and will want" letters of credit, says the sales director at one major dress maker who asked not to be identified. 

Howard Bloom, president of the dress firm Chetta B Inc., says: "It's big time chaos today.
I'm going to ship and hope I get paid.
If I need to ask for money up front later, I will." 

Carol Sanger, vice president, corporate communications at Campeau, says that all of the Federated and Allied chains are paying their bills in a timely manner. "They continue to pay their bills and will do so," says Ms. Sanger. "We're confident we'll be paying our bills for spring merchandise as well." 

Typically, manufacturers are paid 10 days after the month in which they ship.
If goods are shipped to Bloomingdale's between Oct. 1 and Oct. 20, manufacturers expect to be paid by Nov. 10. 

But manufacturers now buying fabric for spring season goods won't be paid until March, April or even May.
Some in the market question whether Campeau will be in a position to pay bills at that time. 

"Everybody is worried about the possibility of cancellations," says Kurt Barnard, publisher of Barnard's Retail Marketing Report. "The buyers who work for the various Campeau chains may lose their jobs.
The stores they work for may be sold.
What that will mean for manufacturers is anybody's guess." 

Campeau's financial situation is complicated by an estimated $1.23 billion in debt due next spring.
This includes a working capital facility for Allied Stores of $350 million that matures March 15, 1990, and an $800 million bridge loan due April 30, 1990.
The company has stated in recently filed financial documents that it anticipates refinancing its March 1990 payments.
In recent months, numerous retailers have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, including Bonwit Teller, B. Altman & Co., and Miller & Rhoads Inc.
Those filings, plus the expected sale of a number of financially healthy chains, such as Saks Fifth Avenue, Marshall Field's and Bloomingdale's, have added to the anxiety. 

"Right now, Federated owes us a considerable amount of money," says Morris Marmalstein, president of David Warren Enterprises, a major dress manufacturer. "We expect they will be current with their debts by the end of the week, but we are considering asking them for letters of credit before we take more orders." 

Mr. Marmalstein adds that his company is now holding some goods in anticipation of being paid in full. "It's become a day-by-day business," he says. "Business has never been this tough before.
Not only does your product have to be excellent, but you also have to be able to collect." 

Other manufacturers are equally cautious.
Bud Konheim, president of Nicole Miller Inc., says his company is now shipping only to the flagship stores of the Federated and Allied chains.
This limits his financial exposure, he says. 

"The branches are just warmed over, empty halls," says Mr. Konheim. "Why should I be part of that problem?
I've got limited production, and I can't give it to underperformers." 

Campeau's Ms. Sanger disputes Mr. Konheim's comments. "Many of the branches are very lucrative," she says. "That's just nonsense." 

As for Mr. Levy at St. Gillian, he says he will maintain his credit lines with the various Campeau stores unless they miss a payment. "If they slip for 10 cents for 10 minutes, I'll stop," he says. 

