.START 

Japan is going on a capital-spending binge that could make its trade surpluses even harder to shrink. 

Its capital spending is growing at double-digit rates for the second year in a row, and its superefficient producers of everything from cars to computer chips are rushing to expand capacity, modernize factories and develop new products. 

"The boom's so huge," says Mitsuru Saito, an economist at Sanwa Research Institute, "it makes you think of the Golden '60s," when Japan developed rapidly. 

The more factories and robots Japanese manufacturers add, the more they will be able to export, and the less their domestic customers will need to import. 

At Canon Inc., for example, sales are up nearly 20% this year; so, the maker of cameras and computer printers is doing what any Japanese company would do under the circumstances: It is increasing capital spending -- by 60%.
It is building, among other things, a new laser-beam-printer factory in western Japan that can produce up to 150,000 printers next year.
Some 70% of them are to be exported to the U.S. 

Even companies in smokestack industries wrestling with world-wide overcapacity are joining the boom.
Japan's steelmakers are raising capital spending 22% this year to $4.8 billion.
Hitachi Zosen Corp., a shipbuilder buried in debt just a few years ago, will build a machinery plant, its first expansion in 14 years. 

So big is the capital-spending boom that Japanese companies' outlays in Japan topped American companies' domestic outlays by $521.4 billion to $494.8 billion in the 12 months ended March 31 even though Japan's total output of goods and services is less than two-thirds America's. 

From a financial standpoint, the boom couldn't come at a better time.
Many Japanese companies expect record profits this fiscal year, and Japanese interest rates, though up a bit recently, are still low.
And in a business system where shareholders have few rights and expect only modest dividends, companies can plow their profits back into plant and equipment. 

But some economists and government officials here aren't applauding.
They fear that the boom may be too big for Japan's or anyone else's good. "It's an explosive cocktail" thrown at the world, says Kenneth Courtis, senior economist at the Tokyo unit of Deutsche Bank Group.
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry is so concerned that it recently took the unusual step of urging Japanese auto companies to exercise caution in capital spending.
MITI officials hope to avoid yet-another source of trade friction with the U.S. even though export restraints currently limit Japanese car exports to the U.S. 

Not everyone is worried, however.
Some economists -- and many Japanese companies -- are puzzled by the warnings.
The investment boom is mainly sparked, they say, by strong domestic demand and isn't likely to increase exports sharply. 

Moreover, much investment isn't aimed at increasing capacity.
According to a survey of some 2,400 large companies by the Japan Development Bank, expanded capacity is the goal of just 51.8% of the outlays; for manufacturers alone, the figure is 32%.
The manufacturers said 14.2% of their spending is designed to improve products or add new ones, 17.5% is to cut costs, 12.5% is for research and development, and the rest is for maintenance and other purposes. 

But the worriers remain unconvinced.
With Japan running enormous trade surpluses against much of the world, they think that Japan should meet the increased domestic demand by importing more.
And eventually, they contend, domestic demand will weaken, forcing companies to emphasize exports again. "If there's a further drive to export," says Nobuyuki Arai, an economist at the Japan Development Bank, "that'll be a problem." 

Even in the short run, the investment boom could exacerbate a disturbing trend: Japanese exports are showing surprisingly little tendency to ease.
Japanese auto makers, for example, are increasing their production capacity in the U.S.; the additional production should, in part, replace imported vehicles with locally manufactured ones.
But although Japanese companies increased their U.S. auto output by 42% from January to September compared with the year-earlier period, their exports to the U.S. will drop only 9% this year, Nikko Research Center estimates. 

In contrast to previous economic booms, Japanese auto companies aren't just trying to boost production.
Many are pouring money into developing high-quality products to target affluent consumers and, to some extent, to avoid direct combat with cheaper cars from South Korea and Taiwan.
Others are replacing older facilities with flexible assembly lines on which different models can be turned out at once.
So many companies are investing in high-tech machinery that Fanuc Ltd., a robot maker, also had to build a new plant.
The buildup is "making Japan clearly more efficient, more technologically advanced and more competitive," declares a Western diplomat in Tokyo. 

But whatever its effects on exports and imports, Japan's investment boom during the past two years has been stimulated at least partly by soaring domestic demand.
Japan's marathon economy, growing at 4.3% this year, is now in its 35th month of expansion, and some economists are betting that the boom will outlast the record 57-month expansion in the late 1960s. 

Japanese consumers are increasingly eager to spend their money, especially on high-priced goods such as 29-inch television sets and luxury cars.
Nissan Motor Co. 's domestic auto sales are up 20% this year largely because its expensive Cima, Sylvia and Cefiro models are in heavy demand. 

"One dealer told me that if he had more cars, he'd sell them right away," says Takuro Endo, Nissan executive vice president.
He adds that the company is trying to keep up with demand "by overworking" its employees.
Similarly, Honda Motor Co. 's sales are so brisk that workers grumble they haven't had a Saturday off in years, despite the government's encouragement of more leisure activity. 

With demand growing and workers in short supply, many Japanese manufacturers are spending heavily on automation.
Among them are the shipbuilders, which had halved their shipyard work forces to cut costs during a prolonged slump in demand but now are capturing an increased share of the strengthening global market.
Sasebo Heavy Industries Co., a medium-sized shipbuilder, expects its sales to increase 30% this year, largely because of rising demand for oil tankers. 

Once one Japanese company steps up its investments, the whole industry follows.
Because most businesses put market share above profitability, to let a competitor's addition to capacity go unmatched is to concede defeat. 

The emphasis on market share is evident at Daikin Industries Ltd., Japan's biggest maker of industrial air conditioners.
Seeing new office buildings sprout up and its sales soar, Daikin is building another plant, which will lift its production capacity 50%.
The expansion is aimed not just at meeting demand but also at expanding the company's market share to 30% from 27% currently.
Besides, Daikin's major competitors, Hitachi Ltd. and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd., "are all adding production lines," a Daikin spokesman says. "Until now, we were trying to increase productivity with the facilities we already had.
But we can't produce enough anymore." 

The competition is even more heated in the auto industry, where companies are racing one another in a world-wide market.
Nissan aims to expand its 25% share of the market to 30% by spending $141 million on a plant in southern Japan that could make as many as 240,000 cars a year.
Meanwhile, Toyota Motor Corp. 's $247 million buildup is increasing its annual capacity by 180,000 cars, and Honda is spending $317 million on expansion.
Mazda Motor Corp. is still considering its options, but it boldly aims to double its annual domestic sales to 800,000 cars in the next four years. 

Those who aren't worried about how Japanese manufacturers' investments will affect trade note that many new products aren't replacements for imports.
Although imports account for less than 1% of beer sales in Japan, Asahi Breweries Ltd., which has been gaining share with its popular dry beer, plans to fend off Japanese competitors by pouring $1.06 billion into facilities to brew 50% more beer.
But new-product development will make Japanese companies stronger, and big investments in "domestic" industries such as beer will make it even tougher for foreign competitors to crack the Japanese market. 

Moreover, much of the investment boom is in high-tech fields in which Japanese companies have only limited foreign competition; so, more investment practically assures more exports.
Toshiba Corp., for example, is spending $986 million on two new plants to build four-megabit dynamic random access memories, the next generation of computer chips.
The product isn't widely used yet, but Toshiba, which has already beaten everyone else in producing the current-generation one-megabit DRAMs, believes that its early investment will heighten its chances of beating its competitors again. "It's important to gain leadership," a Toshiba spokesman says. 

Meanwhile, Toshiba's Japanese rivals, Hitachi, Fujitsu Ltd. and NEC Corp., aren't sitting still.
After doubling production in one plant, NEC is spending $275 million to build another plant that, in two years, will be able to make a million four-megabit DRAMs a year.
The new chip plants "won't be excessive investment," says Hajime Sasaki, an NEC vice president. "We have enough products to make and the markets to sell these products." 

Some of Japan's goods being produced as a result of the investment boom are already successful overseas.
Toyota's $35,000 Lexus automobile, a luxury model that it started shipping to the U.S. only last month, is racking up orders at a time when U.S.-made luxury-car sales are slow.
Toyota plans to raise Lexus exports when a new plant starts up next year. 

What if its sales weaken someday?
Japanese companies have a caveat competitor attitude.
If excess capacity develops, they say, not everyone will suffer.
The losers will be those with the least attractive products, and many of them, analysts think, will be foreign companies. 

