.START 

Comprehensive Care Corp., which has agreed to be acquired by closely held First Hospital Corp., reported a $4.7 million loss for its Aug. 31 first quarter and said it is negotiating an extension of senior bank debt past its Oct. 18 due date. 

In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Comprehensive Care shares plunged $3.625 to close at $4.75 on volume of 1,177,000 shares. 

The loss in Comprehensive Care's latest quarter is equal to 46 cents a share.
In the year-earlier quarter, Comprehensive Care earned $1.6 million, or 18 cents a share.
Revenue in the latest quarter fell 17% to $44 million from $53.2 million, the company said, reflecting poor utilization of the company's facilities and its behavioral medicine contracts. 

Comprehensive Care shareholders have approved acquisition of the developer and operator of Care-Unit chemical dependency and psychiatric programs for about $58 million in cash, notes and stock of First Hospital, Norfolk, Va.
The price was reduced last August from an indicated value of $76 million. 

Comprehensive Care said First Hospital had advised it that both bank debt and senior notes would be repaid after the acquisition, although it isn't assured the acquisition will be completed.
If it isn't completed, Comprehensive Care said it would be "required to promptly restructure its debt." 

First Hospital advised Comprehensive Care that an agent for the financial institutions providing financing of its acquisition is scheduled to make a final credit determination tomorrow, and that a favorable determination could result in a reorganization at Comprehensive Care "by the end of October." Failure to win such a determination, however, would lead Comprehensive Care directors to "consider various alternatives," Comprehensive Care said, without elaborating. 

Separately, First Hospital reported a 1.6% rise in net income to $6.1 million for its year ended June 30 on a 27% increase in revenue to $110.6 million.
It said, however, that net income for the two-month period ended Aug. 31 plunged to $150,000 from $851,000 in the prior year on a 33% rise in revenue to $21.4 million. 

