.START 

Place a phone order through most any catalog and chances are the clerk who answers won't be the only one on the line.
Bosses have big ears these days. 

Or open up an electronics magazine and peruse the ads for sneaky tape recorders and other snooping gadgets.
Some would make even James Bond green with envy. 

Eavesdropping -- both corporate and private -- is on the rise, thanks to the proliferation of surveillance technologies.
And while sellers of the equipment and companies "monitoring" employees have few qualms, right-to-privacy advocates and some lawmakers are alarmed. 

"New technologies are changing the way we deal with each other and the way we work," says Janlori Goldman, a staff attorney at the American Civil Liberties Union. "Our expectation of confidentiality is being eroded." 

On the corporate side, companies claim that monitoring employee phone conversations is both legal and necessary to gauge productivity and ensure good service.
The practice is common at catalog, insurance and phone companies, banks and telemarketers, according to trade groups and worker organizations.
It's also widespread for reservations clerks in the airline, car-rental, hotel and railroad industries. 

The Communications Workers of America, which opposes such monitoring, says supervisors listen in on an estimated 400 million calls each year.
Among companies saying they monitor employees are United Airlines, American Airlines, United Parcel Service, Nynex Corp., Spiegel Inc., and the circulation department of this newspaper.
Some Wall Street firms monitor for recordkeeping purposes. 

Dictaphone Corp. says there's a big business demand for its voice-activated taping systems, whether the sophisticated Veritrac 9000 system, which costs from $10,000 to $120,000 and can record 240 conversations simultaneously, or simple handheld units selling for $395. 

Businesses "want to verify information and ensure accuracy," says John Hiltunen, Dictaphone's manager of media relations.
The state of Alaska recently bought the Veritrac system, he says, "to monitor the Exxon cleanup effort." 

Merrill Lynch & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. say they use voice-activated systems to record and verify orders between salesmen and traders.
Shearson says it has taped some of its institutional trading desks, such as commodities and futures, for about four years.
Both companies stress that employees know they are being recorded and that customer conversations aren't taped. 

Kidder Peabody & Co. says it monitors bond-trading conversations between brokers and customers to safeguard order accuracy. 

Eavesdropping by individuals is harder to measure.
But devices are there for the asking, whether in stores or through the mail.
The Counter Spy Shop in Washington, D.C., for instance, offers the "Secret Connection" attache case, which can surreptitiously record conversations for nine hours at a stretch.
That and other fancy gizmos may cost thousands, but simple voice-activated tape recorders sell for as little as $70 at electronics stores like Radio Shack. 

The most common use of spying devices is in divorce cases, say private investigators.
While tape recordings to uncover, say, infidelity aren't admissible in court, they can mean leverage in a settlement. 

Concerned with the increased availability of surveillance technology and heavier use of it, lawmakers have proposed laws addressing the issue.
Nine states have introduced bills requiring that workers and customers be made aware of monitoring.
And four states -- California, Florida, Michigan and Pennsylvania -- have adopted rules that all parties involved must consent when phone calls are recorded. 

Two bills in Congress hope to make such restrictions national.
In May, Rep. Don Edwards (D. Calif.) introduced congressional legislation that would require an audible beeping during any employee monitoring, warning people that they are being heard. (The legislation is similar to a 1987 "beeper bill" that was defeated after heavy lobbying by the telemarketing industry.) Also last spring, Rep. Ron Dellums (D., Calif.), introduced a bill requiring universal two-party consent to any tapings in cases that don't involve law enforcement.
In addition, products such as voice-activated tape recorders would have to include beep tones and labels explaining federal laws on eavesdropping. 

The outlook on both federal bills is uncertain, especially remembering the 1987 defeat.
The ACLU and worker organizations back tighter laws, but employers and device manufacturers object. 

"I'm sympathetic with workers who feel under the gun," says Richard Barton of the Direct Marketing Association of America, which is lobbying strenuously against the Edwards beeper bill. "But the only way you can find out how your people are doing is by listening." The powerful group, which represents many of the nation's telemarketers, was instrumental in derailing the 1987 bill. 

Spiegel also opposes the beeper bill, saying the noise it requires would interfere with customer orders, causing irritation and even errors.
Laura Dale, center manager at the catalog company's customer order center in Reno, Nev., defends monitoring. "We like to follow up and make sure operators are achieving our standards of company service," says Ms. Dale, who supervises 350 operators. 

John Bonomo, a Nynex spokesman, says the telephone company needs to monitor operators to evaluate performance during the first six months on the job. "Sometimes," he says, "we'll pull someone off the phones for more training." 

Federal wiretap statutes recognize the right of employers to monitor employees' for evaluation purposes.
And in the past, Congress has viewed monitoring as an issue best handled in union negotiations.
But opponents, led by the CWA, say new laws are needed because monitoring is heavily concentrated in service industries and 81% of monitored workers aren't represented by unions.
The CWA claims that monitoring not only infringes on employee privacy, but increases stress. 

"Nine to Five," a Cleveland-based office workers organization that supports the beeper bill, six months ago started a privacy hot line to receive reports of alleged monitoring abuses. 

Meanwhile, supporters of the Dellums two-party consent bill say it is needed because of a giant loophole in the one-party consent law.
Currently, if the person taping is a party to the conversation, it's all right to record without the knowledge of the other person on the line. (Intercepting other people's private conversations is illegal and punishable by five years in prison and fines of $10,000.) 

The electronics industry is closely following the Dellums bill.
Some marketers of surveillance gear -- including Communication Control System Ltd., which owns the Counter Spy Shop and others like it -- already put warning labels in their catalogs informing customers of the one-party law.
But vendors contend that they can't control how their products are used. 

Radio Shack says it has a policy against selling products if a salesperson suspects they will be used illegally. "Everything sold at Radio Shack has a legal purpose," says Bernard Appel, president of the Tandy Corp. subsidiary.
He says he hasn't yet studied the Dellums bill, but that requiring a beeping tone on recorders "would be ludicrous." 

Still, Radio Shack is aware that some of its products are controversial.
A few years ago, the company voluntarily stopped selling "The Big Ear," a powerful microphone.
With its ability to pick up rustlings and flapping wings, "it was meant to be a toy for children for bird watching," says Mr. Appel. "But we were getting too many complaints that people were using them to eavesdrop on their neighbors." 

