.START 

One day last March, CBS Sports President Neal Pilson and Olympics superagent Barry Frank met for lunch at the Lotos Club here.
Mr. Frank told Mr. Pilson that Olympics officials wanted $290 million or more for TV rights to the 1994 Winter Games in Norway.
The CBS official said that price sounded fine. 

At that price, CBS was the only player at the table when negotiations with the International Olympic Committee started in Toronto Aug. 23.
Dick Pound, a committee member, began by disclosing that ABC and NBC had refused to even bid.
Then, he asked Mr. Pilson to raise his offer anyway: "If we can have a number that starts with a three, you can have a dea." 

Mr. Pilson and his team huddled in a hallway and took just 10 minutes to return with a $300 million offer.
Mr. Pound responded, "It's a deal." A beaming Mr. Pilson announced his lastest coup at a news conference that afternoon. 

Mr. Pilson's rivals at ABC and NBC grimaced at the price.
How could CBS get pushed into outbidding itself?
Well, CBS, mired in the ratings cellar and looking to sports as a way out, wanted to close the deal immediately and block its rivals from getting another chance to bid.
But Mr. Pilson has been put in the uncomfortable role of setting off a bidding frenzy for sports rights, a frenzy that the networks had hoped to avoid. 

"The price of poker has gone up," crows Charles M. Neinas, the College Football Association's executive director. 

With CBS Inc. on a spending spree that may top $2.5 billion for four years of major sports events, the new bout of hyperinflation could jolt the entire broadcast business.
CBS itself could run up losses of a few hundred million dollars on four years of various sports if its big gamble goes wrong.
ABC, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., and General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. also risk losses if they outbid CBS for other contracts. 

While rights fees head skyward, ad rates won't.
Advertisers already are balking at higher prices. "The networks are paying too much for rights," warns adman Paul Isacsson of Young & Rubicam. "If they ask advertisers to absorb the costs, they're likely to lose all but a few who need sports, above all." 

Viewers may not be cheering, either.
Soaring rights fees will lead to an even greater clutter of commercials.
At the same time, some sports events will move off "free" television and onto cable or pay-cable, where half the nation's TV homes can't see them. 

CBS has changed the rules by throwing out the old basis for sports bids -- that is, can the network alone make a profit on it?
Mr. Pilson emphasizes the ancillary benefits of positive press, contented affiliate stations, enthusiastic advertisers and huge audiences that might stick around to watch other CBS programs when the game is over.
The billion-dollar question is, How much are those benefits worth? 

Some TV people doubt they will materialize and argue that even if they do, they won't offset the multimillion-dollar deficits that CBS could run up. "As we've seen in the '80s," says Roger Werner, the president of the ESPN sports channel, "those deals can turn sour if the numbers don't work.
And three years later, in a sea of red ink, the heroes can find themselves with a lot of explaining to do." 

CBS pursues top sports "to belie the fact that they aren't supporting affiliates, viewers and advertisers," charges Thomas H. Wyman, who was ousted as chairman of CBS Inc. after Laurence A. Tisch bought a 24.9% stake in the company and took over three years ago. "They lost the entertainment crown, and they needed one.
And they've bought one." 

On just three big deals -- for four years of baseball and for the Olympic Winter Games in both 1992 and 1994 -- Pilson bid a total of $1.64 billion.
That's well over half a billion dollars more than ABC and NBC were willing to pay. (After 1992, the winter and summer Olympics will be held two years apart, with the revised schedule beginning with the winter games in 1994 and the summer games in 1996.) 

Now, Mr. Pilson -- a former college basketball player who says a good negotiator needs "a level offocus and intellectual attention" similar to a good athlete-s is facing the consequences of his own aggressiveness.
Next month, talks will begin on two coveted CBS contracts, for the pro and college basketball finals.
CBS is likely to spend whatever it takes to keep them.
The potential bill: more than $600 million for several seasons, an 80% jump.
A few months later, CBS's college and pro football contracts come up for renewal; they could go for close to $100 million more than CBS now pays, a 40% to 50% rise. 

"What happens to those two basketball contracts will shape the next five years of network sports," says Peter Lund, a former CBS Sports president now at Multimedia Inc. J. William Grimes, former president of ESPN, says NBC may "come in with a huge bid for college basketball to take it away from CBS and say, 'We can overbid, too. ' And the winners will be the colleges, not either network.
Nor, by the way, advertisers." 

Mr. Pilson is an unlikely big spender.
In the mid-1980s, after ABC had just bid a record $309 million for the 1988 Winter Games, he sniped at rivals for paying reckless prices. "I love Pilson, but he was the guy who complained most bitterly and loudly," says Robert Wussler, a former CBS Sports president. "And yet his company is one reason why rights are so high today." Rivals carp at "the principle of Pilson," as NBC's Arthur Watson once put it -- "he's always expounding that rights are too high, then he's going crazy." 

But the 49-year-old Mr. Pilson is hardly a man to ignore the numbers.
A Yale law school graduate, he began his career in corporate law and then put in years at Metromedia Inc. and the William Morris talent agency.
In 1976, he joined CBS Sports to head business affairs and, five years later, became its president. 

Mr. Pilson says that when he spoke out a few years ago, "I didn't say forever, and I didn't say every property." The market changed, he adds.
And he isn't the only big spender: NBC will pay a record $401 million for the 1992 Summer Games, and ESPN, 80%-owned by Capital Cities/ABC, will shell out $400 million for four years of baseball, airing 175 regular-season games a year. 

"Our competitors say we overbid them.
Who cares?
Maybe we recognize values the other guys don't," Mr. Pilson says. 

Mr. Pilson's "Major Events" strategy jelled after Mr. Tisch took over.
Mr. Pilson recalls that in April 1986, after CBS's annual meeting in Philadelphia, he and Mr. Tisch took the 90-minute train ride back to New York, and Mr. Pilson used this extended private audience to outline his ambitions.
Mr. Tisch, a billionaire in hotels and finance, was just learning the TV business.
Five months later, Mr. Tisch took over as CBS's chief executive, and soon he was wielding sole approval each time Mr. Pilson scribbled a frighteningly large figure on a slip of paper, sealed it in an envelope and gave it to sports negotiators. 

Then, in May 1988, Mr. Tisch urgently needed to make a bold statement to quell rumors that he might sell the network.
Mr. Pilson gave him one: He bid $243 million for rights to the 1992 Winter Games in Albertville, France; ABC and NBC wouldn't bid even $200 million.
That started the still-raging bidding wars. 

The "Major Events" strategy, Mr. Pilson says, is designed to notch a place for CBS on the crowded TV dial of the 1990s.
It's also a fast fix for an ailing image.
He sees flashy sports as the only way the last-place network can cut through the clutter of cable and VCRs, grab millions of new viewers and tell them about other shows premiering a few weeks later.
Next October, CBS, for the first time, won't have to start the season against the much-watched American and National baseball league championships and the World Series. 

"I've been struggling against that for years," says Jonathan Rodgers, who runs WBBM-TV, the CBS-owned station in Chicago.
Even if baseball triggers losses at CBS -- and he doesn't think it will -- "I'd rather see the games on our air than on NBC and ABC," he says. 

That isn't surprising.
Regular TV series ratings have slumped in the past five years, and premiering new shows is "a crap shoot," Mr. Pilson says.
But top sports events are still a strong bet to lure audiences 30% or 40% larger than those CBS usually gets. 

Mr. Pilson says baseball and the Olympics may help CBS move up to No. 2 in the household ratings race, putting pizazz back into the network's image.
And the Winter Olympics will air during the February "sweeps," when ratings are used to set ad rates for local stations. 

That will please once-grumpy affiliates -- another aim of the Pilson plan.
They gleefully await the "dream season" in 1990.
CBS will air the Super Bowl, baseball playoffs, college and pro basketball finals and other premier sports events. "It's made me more committed to CBS," says Philip A. Jones, the president of Meredith Corp. 's broadcast group, which has two CBS affiliates. 

The CBS plan to use big-time sports as a platform for other series carries no guarantee of success, however.
No amount of hype will bring viewers back if the shows are weak. "In this market of 40 channels, sophisticated viewers and the remote control, trial isn't a guarantee of anything," ESPN's Mr. Werner says. "If the show ain't a killer, they're gone." 

During the 1984 Summer Games, for example, ABC touted "Call to Glory," but the military drama was missing in action within weeks.
Last October, during the 1988 Summer Games, NBC relentlessly pitched a new series, "Tattingers." It belly-flopped anyway. 

Moreover, sports is hardly the best way to lure adult women.
Though CBS might move up to No. 2 in household ratings, most advertisers buy based on ratings for women aged 18 to 49.
CBS may remain a distant No. 3 in that regard. 

Nor is CBS a shoo-in to get blockbuster ratings.
In recent years, the World Series and the Olympics were aired against CBS's last-place lineup.
But CBS will put the athletes up against Bill Cosby, "Cheers" and other shows in NBC's No. 1 schedule. 

Even the boon to affiliate relations may be limited.
The sports lineup may add only 1% to 5% to a station's annual profits.
It alone isn't likely to stop a station from dumping CBS shows. "The World Series, seven nights, wasn't enough of an incentive," says Arnold Klinsky of WHEC-TV in Rochester, which dropped CBS for NBC six weeks ago. "You've got to judge where the network will be in three years." 

The intangible benefits may prove extremely costly if CBS can't avoid big losses on the sports coverage itself.
And avoiding such losses will take a monumental effort.
On the $1.06 billion baseball agreement alone, CBS is likely to lose $250 million in four years, contends Mr. Wussler, the former CBS man, now at Comsat Inc. Nevertheless, he deems the deal "plain smart" for its huge promotional value. 

Mr. Pilson calls that loss estimate "wildly inaccurate," conceding only that CBS will lose money on baseball in the first year. "It's too early to tell" what happens after that, he says.
But Mr. Tisch expects losses in all four years of the contract, he told U.S. senators last June. 

CBS will pay an average of $82 million more each year than ABC and NBC had paid together -- and those two networks expect losses on baseball this season.
Yet CBS will air only 12 regular-season games, 26 fewer than ABC and NBC.
That has outraged some fans.
It also indicates a $50 million drop in ad sales for regular-season games -- a risk CBS took to get an unprecedented lock on all playoff games.
If the playoffs end in four-game sweeps, losses could soar. 

Advertisers are resisting higher prices, which would help close the gap.
CBS signed General Motors and Toyota to be the only auto-maker sponsors in baseball for four years.
Price: $265 million.
But ad executives who negotiated the deal say that works out to only $275,000 for a 30-second ad in the World Series through 1993 -- 17% less than what ABC is charging for the Series this month.
Moreover, "there's no question ad rates will come down considerably" from the GM-Toyota price, says Arnold Chase of Bozell Inc. Other admen, however, say rates could rise later if ad spending surges. 

The Winter Games outlook also is mixed.
CBS expects to make modest profits, but rivals contend that it will take a beating.
ABC lost $75 million on the 1988 Winter Games, partly because of its $309 million rights fee.
It aired 94.5 hours of mostly live events in Calgary -- helping raise ratings slightly from 1984 -- but still failed to deliver the audience promised to advertisers. 

CBS will add 25 1/2 hours to that load in 1992, and ratings could be hurt by a lack of live events.
All prime-time fare will be on tape-delay because of time differences with Norway, so the results can be announced on the 6 o'clock news. (Turner Broadcasting will pay CBS $25 million to air 50 hours of CBS coverage plus 50 hours of additional events.) 

Barry Frank, the agent who took Mr. Pilson to lunch last March, says that even if CBS loses, say, $10 million, it matters little. "Ten million ain't jack, man, when you got $3 billion sitting in the bank," says Mr. Frank, senior vice president at International Management Group, citing CBS's enormous cash reserves from selling off various businesses. "It doesn't mean anything -- it's public-relations money." 

Moreover, sports has "claimed its place" as a guaranteed ratings-getter, says David J. Stern, the commissioner of the National Basketball Association. "This isn't outlandish bidding; this is a situation of very careful businessmen making judgments about the worth of product and acting on it. . . . I would tend to trust their judgment." 

That's easy for him to say: CBS's four-year NBA pact, now at $176 million for four years, could double in price by the time his talks with Mr. Pilson are completed later this month.
That would cut into CBS's slim margin for profit -- and error.
CBS Sports earned $50 million or so last year.
And CBS takes in the least money in prime time; ABC and NBC charge 30% to 35% more for ads, according to a Variety survey. 

But CBS's costs are huge, and the risks go up with each new sports package that CBS locks up.
Although sports officials predict jumps of 50% to 100% in the major contracts coming up for renewal, ad rates may rise only 20%.
CBS hopes to save money by ordering fewer episodes of regular series because sports will fill up a few weeks of prime time.
But the savings will be minuscule.
Each hour of Olympics and baseball in prime time will cost CBS $2.6 million to $2.8 million; an hour-long drama costs only $900,000, and it is aired twice. 

CBS may cushion losses with about $200 million a year in interest earned on the proceeds from selling CBS Records and other businesses.
But media-stock analyst Richard J. MacDonald of MacDonald Grippo Riely says Wall Street won't take kindly to that. "On a stand-alone basis, the network ought to make money," he says. 

When Mr. Pilson is asked directly -- can you make money on all this? -- he doesn't exactly say yes. "What you're really asking is, Are the profit and loss margins anticipated on the events acceptable to management?" he says.
Then, he answers his own question. "Yes, they are.
That's the only question we need to address." 

