.START 

International Business Machines Corp. said it agreed to let Motorola Inc. participate in a semiconductor research project as part of its effort to bolster the U.S. semiconductor industry. 

IBM, which made the announcement at the dedication of a research center here, said it invited many other companies to participate as well, including some from Europe.
Jack Kuehler, IBM's president, said IBM is also considering letting other companies participate in additional semiconductor work but declined to be more specific. 

IBM, which said a year ago it was inviting companies to participate in some semiconductor work, has become far more open about its technology as it has tried to rally U.S. industry to head off the Japanese, who now dominate the market for dynamic random access memory chips. 

While IBM, Armonk, N.Y., makes the bulk of the DRAMs it uses, it doesn't make the equipment needed to produce those chips.
And IBM worries that the Japanese will take over that equipment market, too, unless U.S. semiconductor companies produce enough memory chips here to keep U.S. equipment makers healthy.
Failure of U.S. equipment makers, IBM fears, would leave it dependent on many of the Japanese companies that compete with it in other parts of the market. 

IBM also said it expects to benefit from the expertise that Motorola and other companies can bring to bear on the difficult problems involved in semiconductor manufacturing.
IBM already participates in one industrywide effort to improve semiconductor-manufacturing techniques. 

IBM said it expects industrywide efforts to become prevalent because semiconductor manufacturing has become so expensive.
A state-of-the-art plant cost $40 million in the mid-1970s but costs $500 million today because the technology is so complex.
And IBM said it expects the costs to continue climbing. 

IBM, which said Motorola is paying just a nominal fee to cover the 21-month agreement, acknowledged some companies had turned down its invitation to join in.
But it said that was mainly because the project may not bear fruit until the mid-1990s.
IBM said it thought more companies would become interested as the project progresses. 

The project involving Motorola concerns a technique, called X-ray lithography, that figures to be crucial to future generations of memory chips. 

Currently, chips are produced by shining light through a mask to produce an image on the chip, much as a camera produces an image on film.
But details on chips must now be extraordinarily fine, and the wavelengths of even ultraviolet light are long enough so that the images they draw may be too blurry -- much as someone using a wide paintbrush could produce a broad line but would have trouble painting a thin one.
X-rays, by contrast, travel straighter and can be focused more tightly than light. 

X-rays have problems, too.
They can make the masks brittle and can pass through material they're not supposed to.
But, assuming those problems can be overcome, they should allow for memory chips that could approach one billion bits of information -- 250 times as much as is contained in the four-megabit chips that are just reaching the market and a million times what was possible in the mid-1970s. 

