.START 

A major Tokyo newspaper reported that a Japanese department store concern is planning to offer about $1.3 billion to buy Bloomingdale's.
Campeau Corp., the chain's owner, declined to comment on the report. 

A spokeswoman said Toronto-based Campeau has received "expressions of interest" in Bloomingdale's, but she declined to comment on whether any actual bids had been made.
Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading economic newspaper, reported Wednesday that Tokyu Department Store Co. is planning to team up with U.S. and Western European financing to buy the New York-based retail chain, which Campeau has put up for sale.
The service didn't identify its Tokyu sources. 

"This is the first of many rumors we expect to hear during the sale's process," said a Bloomingdale's spokesman. "We won't comment on them." 

Tokyu executives weren't available for comment early Thursday morning in Tokyo. 

Campeau's chairman, Robert Campeau, said at its annual meeting in July that he valued Bloomingdale's at $2 billion.
Among previously disclosed possible bidders is Bloomingdale's Chairman Marvin Traub, who has aligned himself with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Blackstone Group. 

Investment bankers in Tokyo confirmed that Tokyu Department Store is one of several Japanese companies that has been approached by representatives of a management committee headed by Bloomingdale's Mr. Traub.
But they said detailed financial figures haven't been passed yet to any prospective buyers. 

"Nobody is going to make a real bid before the middle of November," said one investment banker familiar with the discussions in Japan. "Tokyu is one of the potential buyers who might raise its hand.
But it's in very early stages still." 

Bloomingdale's is a 17-store chain acquired last year by Campeau in its $6.6 billion acquisition of Federated.
Bloomingdale's does an estimated $1.2 billion in annual sales. 

The sale of Bloomingdale's is a condition of efforts by Toronto-based Olympia & York Developments Ltd. to arrange $800 million in bridge financing for Campeau, which disclosed last month that its retailing units, Federated Department Stores Inc. and Allied Stores Corp., were strapped for cash.
O&Y, owned by Toronto's Reichmann family, is also supervising major restructuring and refinancing of Campeau, a Toronto-based real estate and retailing company. 

One executive familiar with the Bloomingdale's situation said, "No book has been issued regarding Bloomingdale's, there are no projections, so I doubt very much whether any bid has been made." 

Separately, a Campeau shareholder filed suit, charging Campeau, Chairman Robert Campeau and other officers with violating securities law. 

The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Manhattan, seeks class-action status.
The suit accuses the retailer and several of its officers of making false and misleading statements about the company's business affairs.
The suit says the company failed to disclose material adverse information about its financial condition. 

A spokesman for the company said Campeau hasn't seen the suit and declined to comment. 

