.START 

The New York Stock Exchange is expected to launch its own program trading vehicle today, just as controversy over this trading strategy heats up. 

The Big Board this morning plans to begin trading its Exchange Stock Portfolio "basket" product, the first program-trading vehicle carrying the exchange's seal of approval.
ESPs will allow institutional investors to buy or sell all 500 stocks in Standard & Poor's index in a single trade of a minimum of $5 million. "Customized" baskets of fewer stocks will also be available. 

The Securities and Exchange Commission gave provisional six-month approval to the Big Board basket at a meeting late yesterday.
The SEC at the same time approved a similar but smaller basket product on the Chicago Board Options Exchange, where the minimum will be $1.7 million.
Also approved was a plan to trade stock portfolios by computer after regular hours on the Midwest Stock Exchange. 

The basket products are "an evolutionary step" in solving problems in trading big blocks of stock that came to light in the 1987 market crash, said SEC Commissioner Joseph Grundfest. 

New SEC Chairman Richard Breeden, overseeing his first public meeting, said there have been concerns that the Big Board's basket could attract investors with a "short-term perspective" who would rapidly turn over the product, thus increasing volatility. 

But Richard Ketchum, the SEC's market regulation chief, said he didn't believe "this will spawn dramatic new program-trading strategies that will be destabilizing." 

The baskets on the Big Board and CBOE -- which involve the actual S&P stocks, unlike the stock-index contracts currently traded on the Chicago futures markets, and index options on the CBOE -- will begin trading as critics step up their attacks on program trading and its contributions to the stock market's wild price swings. 

The Big Board argues that its new product will help rather than hurt the situation by possibly drawing business from more-volatile forms of program trading. 

ESPs are also an attempt by the Big Board to head off the exodus of program trading business to overseas markets such as London.
Big Board officials also hope Japanese investors will become interested in the exchange's product. 

Already, many of the Big Board's own floor traders are warning that the ESP baskets are risky and not in the best interests of the investing public.
The 400-member Alliance of Floor Brokers said the new product, with the $5 million minimum, will benefit only big institutional investors and could lead to "wild spasms of volatility." 

Stockbrokers who cater to individual investors said the Big Board's new product confirms the exchange doesn't want to curtail program trading, which last month accounted for a record 13.8% of the exchange's average daily volume. 

"The New York Stock Exchange is losing its cool here," said James Andrews, head of institutional trading at Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. in Philadelphia.
The new stock baskets "are going to make it easier for program trading to be done.
And it's going to be done more frequently as the result of having more access to it at different places." 

Both the Big Board's Exchange Stock Portfolio and the Chicago exchange's Market Basket are designed for institutional investors.
The Big Board lists its targets as pension plans, mutual fund managers and index-arbitrage traders.
In index arbitrage, program traders buy and sell stocks and stock-index futures to profit from small price discrepancies between the markets. 

At the same time, only four securities firms have signed up with the Big Board to buy and sell ESPs as market makers, an unenthusiastic response.
The market makers so far are CS First Boston Group's First Boston Corp. unit, Morgan Stanley & Co., PaineWebber Group Inc. and Salomon Inc. 's Salomon Brothers Inc. unit. 

Kidder, Peabody & Co., a General Electric Co. unit that has become the biggest program trader along with Morgan Stanley, isn't a market maker, although the Big Board hopes that will change.
Similarly, the Big Board hopes to entice Merrill Lynch & Co. Neither has plans to be a market maker for now. 

Traders said major securities firms are reluctant to become market makers because they fear the baskets may attract only limited trading.
Big Board officials say only 25 contracts a day may trade at first, equivalent to a day's action at a small, regional exchange. 

Even though the Big Board says its product represents a post-crash "reform," some traders suggest that if the new basket had been trading during this month's Friday the 13th market plunge, the Dow Jones Industrial Average might have dropped more than the 190 points it did. 

With the futures locked into a trading halt Oct. 13 and trading in some individual stock difficult, program traders would have undoubtedly fled to the basket system, the traders say. "If we had the baskets, we would be leaving in caskets," one trader said. 

The SEC's Mr. Breeden said the after-hours trading on the Midwest exchange would help the U.S. win back business that has moved overseas to conduct after-hours trades. 

