.START 

Federal health officials are expected today to approve a program granting long-deferred access to the drug AZT for children with acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 

Announcement of the approval is expected to be made by Louis Sullivan, secretary of Health and Human Services.
The clearance by the Food and Drug Administration comes after two years of restricted access for the youngest victims of AIDS to the only antiviral drug yet cleared to treat the fatal disease. 

The drug will be given treatment investigational new drug status, a label accorded to drugs believed effective but lacking formal approval.
The move will make the drug available free of charge for a time to children with the disease and symptoms of advanced infection. 

Adults with AIDS have had access to AZT since FDA approved the drug's usage for adults in March 1987.
But despite more than two years of research showing AZT can relieve dementia and other symptoms in children, the drug still lacks federal approval for use in the youngest patients.
As a result, many youngsters have been unable to obtain the drug and, for the few exceptions, insurance carriers won't cover its cost of $6,400 a year. 

So far, AIDS has stricken 1,859 children under age 13, with many times that number believed to carry the infection without symptoms.
To date, 1,013 of those children have died, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control. 

Mothers of young AIDS patients expressed somber satisfaction. 

"Thank goodness it's happening.
It should have happened sooner," said Elizabeth Glaser, a Los Angeles mother and activist who contracted the AIDS virus through a blood transfusion, and transmitted it to two of her children.
One of them, a daughter Ariel, died a year ago at age seven after her parents unsuccessfully pleaded for the drug. 

"I could get AZT," says Mrs. Glaser, who bears her infection without any symptoms. "But my daughter couldn't, until she was too ill to take it.
To watch your child die is an inhuman experience." Her son, healthy and symptom-free, currently takes no medication. 

The delay in getting AZT to children has been blamed on a combination of factors.
Traditionally, the medical establishment has waited two years to approve adult treatments for pediatric uses, because of a combination of conservative safety standards and red tape.
Secondly, critics have charged AZT's maker Burroughs Wellcome Co. with corporate inertia because children account for just 1% of the patient population and hence a small part of the large and lucrative market. 

Wellcome has replied that it is moving ahead to compile the relevant data, and recently promised to develop a pediatric syrup form easier for youngsters to take. 

Still, all this comes nearly a year and a half after Philip Pizzo of the National Cancer Institute offered evidence that AZT could reverse the ravages of AIDS dementia, sometimes prompting dramatic recovery of IQ levels and reappearance of lost motor skills.
Since then, roughly 50 pediatric patients have received the drug in his program. 

To some mothers, the expected FDA action is a poignant reminder of what might have been. 

"My first reaction is I don't understand why it's taken so long.
Why has it taken people so long for people to understand pediatric AIDS is a major problem?" asked Helen Kushnick, whose son Samuel died six years ago at age three, victim of a tainted transfusion. 

Similar sentiments were voiced on Capitol Hill. 

"While I'm pleased the FDA is finally releasing AZT for children, it's taken much too long to get to this point," said Rep. Ted Weiss. "Why did it take Burroughs Wellcome so long to apply" for treatment investigational new drug status? the New York Democrat asked. 

"Let's not forget this is the same company that has been profiteering with this drug for 2 1/2 years," Mr. Weiss added. 

Mrs. Glaser, who is a co-founder of the Pediatric AIDS Foundation, based in Santa Monica, Calif., condemned neither bureaucratic nor corporate foot-dragging. 

"There's no finger to be pointed," she said. "The crucial thing is that we learn our lesson well, and to make sure other experimental drugs, like Bristol-Myers Co. 's DDI, don't follow the same frustrating course as AZT." 

AIDS dementia -- which gradually steals children's ability to speak, walk and think -- is often the most striking aspect of the pediatric syndrome.
For some patients, AZT has restored the ability to ride a bicycle or solve puzzles, giving back a piece of their childhood if only temporarily. 

"It's impossible to overstate how much this means to the families of these patients," said Samuel Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute and a main developer of AZT. 

