.START 

Maggie Thatcher must be doing something right; her political enemies are screaming louder than ever. 

Mrs. Thatcher, who was practicing the read-my-lips school of politics years before Mr. Bush encountered it, has made clear her opposition to refashioning Britain's free-market policies to suit the bureaucrats in Brussels.
In return, Mrs. Thatcher is excoriated from Fleet Street to Paris as an obstructionist. 

Well, it now turns out that Mrs. Thatcher had to travel across the globe to the 49-member Commonwealth summit in Kuala Lumpur to discomfit the Holy Order of Consensus Builders. 

"A disastrous farce in Malaysia," screamed the Manchester Guardian. "She can no longer be trusted to behave in a civilised -- that is unflaky -- fashion when abroad." Egad.
Canada's Brian Mulroney and Australia's Bob Hawke, the paper said, were "enraged." The London Times said she had "contravened protocol." 

As usual, her sin was saying what she thought.
She issued a separate statement, separating herself from a Commonwealth document reasserting the political value of imposing sanctions against South Africa.
While supporting the Commonwealth "in utterly condemning apartheid," her statement urged it to "encourage change" rather than inflict further punishment on the country's black population. 

Actually there is a consensus somewhere on sanctions: In May a Gallup Poll found that most South African blacks, 85%, oppose economic sanctions.
Still, Mrs. Thatcher had once again gone against the grain.
Malaysia's Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad sniffed, "If everybody else puts out their left foot and you put out your right foot, you are out of step." Mrs. Thatcher: "If it's one against 48, I'm very sorry for the 48." 

If indeed Mrs. Thatcher has one opponent that could throw her off political course it is Britain's mysteriously intractable inflation problem.
We cannot, however, join the political chorus that as one proclaims how offputting it is that Mrs. Thatcher refuses to get along by going along.
It is refreshing to see at least one world figure who knows what she believes in and is not inclined to reflexively compromise those beliefs. 

Perhaps Mrs. Thatcher understands better than those distressed at her style that ultimately history and Britain's voters will decide who is right about Europe, sanctioning South Africa or running Britain's economy. 

