.START 

The "seismic" activity of a financial market bears a resemblance to the seismic activity of the earth.
When things are quiet (low volatility), the structures on which markets stand can be relatively inefficient and still perform their functions adequately.
However, when powerful forces start shaking the market's structure, the more "earthquake-resistant" it is, the better its chance for survival. 

America's financial markets do not yet have all the required modern features required to make them fully "aftershock-resistant." Investors lack equal access to the markets' trading arena and its information. 

That structural lack is crucial because investors are the only source of market liquidity.
And liquidity is what markets need to damp quakes and aftershocks.
In today's markets, specialists (on the New York Stock Exchange) and "upstairs" market makers (in the over-the-counter market) are the only market participants allowed to play a direct role in the price-determination process.
When they halt trading, all market liquidity is gone.
And when any component of the market -- cash, futures or options -- loses liquidity, the price discovery system (the way prices are determined) becomes flawed or is lost entirely for a time. 

Last Friday the 13th (as well as two years ago this week) the markets became unlinked.
When that happened, "seismic" tremors of fear -- much like the shock waves created by an earthquake -- coursed through the market and increased the market's volatility.
Lack of important, needed information can cause fear.
Fear is the father of panic.
Panic frequently results in irrational behavior.
And in financial markets, irrational behavior is sometimes translated into catastrophe. 

When market tremors start, it is crucial that as much information about transaction prices and the supply-demand curve (buy and sell orders at various prices) be made available to all, not just to market makers.
Because of a lack of information and access, many investors -- including the very ones whose buying power could restore stability and damp volatility -- are forced to stand on the sidelines when they are most needed, because of their ignorance of important market information.
To add aftershock-damping power to America's markets, a modern, electronic trading system should be implemented that permits equal access to the trading arena (and the information that would automatically accompany such access) by investors -- particularly institutional investors. 

Contrary to some opinions, the trading activities of specialists and other market makers do not provide liquidity to the market as a whole.
What market makers provide is immediacy, a very valuable service.
Liquidity is not a service.
It is a market attribute -- the ability to absorb selling orders without causing significant price changes in the absence of news. 

Market makers buy what investors wish to sell; their business is reselling these unwanted positions as quickly as possible to other investors, and at a profit.
As a result, while any one customer may purchase immediacy by selling to a market maker (which is micro-liquidity for the investor), the market as a whole remains in the same circumstances it was before the transaction: The unwanted position is still an unwanted position; only the identity of the seller has changed.
In fact it can be argued that increasing capital commitments by market makers (a result of some post-1987 crash studies) also increases market volatility, since the more securities are held by market makers at any given time, the more selling pressure is overhanging the market. 

In an open electronic system, any investor wishing to pay for real-time access to the trading arena through a registered broker-dealer would be able to see the entire supply-demand curve (buy and sell orders at each price) entered by dealers and investors alike, and to enter and execute orders.
Current quotations would reflect the combined financial judgment of all market participants -- not just those of intermediaries who become extremely risk-averse during times of crisis. 

Investors and professionals alike would compete on the level playing field Congress sought and called a "national market system" (not yet achieved) almost 15 years ago when it passed the Securities Reform Act of 1975. 

Last Friday's market gyrations did not result in severe "aftershocks." Were we smart or just lucky?
I'm not certain.
But I am sure we need to maximize our "earthquake" protection by making certain that our market structures let investors add their mighty shock-damping power to our nation's markets. 

Mr. Peake is chairman of his own consulting company in Englewood, N.J. 

