.START 

The prices of corn futures contracts jumped amid rumors that the Soviet Union is keeping up its dizzying October buying binge of U.S. corn. 

Those rumors were confirmed after the end of trading yesterday when the U.S. Agriculture Department announced that the Soviets had bought 1.2 million metric tons of U.S. corn, bringing their U.S. corn purchases confirmed so far this month to about five million metric tons. 

In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for December delivery jumped 5.75 cents a bushel to settle at $2.44 a bushel. 

The Soviet purchases are close to exceeding what some analysts had expected the Soviet Union to buy this fall, the season in which it usually buys much of the corn it imports from the U.S.
That pace is causing some analysts to speculate that the Soviet Union might soon purchase as much as another two million metric tons. 

One sign that more Soviet purchases are possible is that U.S. grain companies yesterday bought an unusually large amount of corn futures contracts.
That sometimes signals that they are laying plans to export corn. 

By some estimates, several grain companies combined bought contracts for the possession of roughly one million metric tons of corn.
By buying futures contracts, these companies attempt to protect themselves from swings in the price of the corn that they are obligated to deliver. 

Rumors of Soviet interest also pushed up the prices of soybean futures contracts.
Among other things, the Agriculture Department is widely thought to be mulling whether to subsidize the sale of soybean oil to the Soviet Union. 

On top of all this, corn and soybean prices rose on reports that the Midwest harvest was disrupted by a freakishly early snow storm that dumped several inches in parts of Indiana and Ohio.
The harvest delays, however, are expected to be temporary.
Balmy temperatures are forecast for next week, said Robert Lekberg, an analyst at Farmers Grain & Livestock Corp., Chicago. 

Many farmers used the jump in prices to sell their recently harvested crop to grain elevator companies.
The heavy selling by farmers helped to damp the price rally. 

Wheat futures prices rose slightly. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices declined.
A number of developments were negatively interpreted by traders.
December delivery gold fell $1.80 an ounce to $370.60.
December silver eased 2.7 cents an ounce to $5.133.
January platinum was down $3.60 an ounce at $491.10.
One price-depressing development was the lower-than-expected increase of only 0.2% in the consumer price index for September, an analyst said.
He noted that the "core inflation rate," which excludes food and energy, was also low at 0.2%.
Other news that weighed on the market: Initial unemployment claims rose by 62,000 last week; American Telephone & Telegraph Co. will reduce its managerial staff by 15,000 through attrition; the oil market turned weaker; there wasn't any investor demand for bullion; and the dollar strengthened during the day, putting pressure on gold.
Also, the analyst said, economic circumstances are such that both South Africa and the Soviet Union, the principal gold and platinum producers, are being forced to continue selling the metals.
Both are in great need of foreign exchange, and South Africa is also under pressure to meet foreign loan commitments, he said. "Putting it all together, we have a negative scenario that doesn't look like it will improve overnight," he said. 

COPPER: Futures prices recovered in quiet trading.
The December contract rose 1.50 cents a pound to $1.2795.
That contract fell a total of 5.75 cents during the first three days of this week, mostly in reaction to last Friday's stock market plunge, which prompted concern that it might signal a similar sharp slowing of the U.S. economy and thus reduced demand for copper, a leading industrial metal.
In recent days, however, there has been increased purchasing of copper in London, an analyst said.
Some of this buying was by Japan, which has had its supplies sharply reduced by long production stoppages at the Bougainville mine in Papua New Guinea, Highland Valley mine in British Columbia, and the Cananea mine in Mexico, which are major shippers to Japan.
The increasing likelihood that Cananea and Highland Valley will soon return to production may have cut some of that purchasing, but even if any of these mines begin operating soon, their output won't be significant until at least the end of the year, analysts note.
So, one analyst said, even though the long-term production problems may be easing, there will still be a significant need for copper over the next three months, when inventories will remain relatively low. 

ENERGY: Crude oil prices ended mixed.
West Texas Intermediate for November delivery fell 14 cents a barrel to $20.42.
But so-called outer month contracts finished higher.
For instance, December contracts for WTI rose 17 cents to $20.42.
Most energy futures opened lower, following Wednesday's market downturn.
But a flurry of late trading yesterday beefed up prices.
Heating oil and gasoline futures ended higher as well. 

