.START 

THE PANHANDLER approaches, makes his pitch.
It may be straightforward -- he wants money for food -- or incredibly convoluted; his sister is at this very moment near death in Hoboken, he has lost his wallet and has only $1.22 in change to put toward a bus ticket costing $3.83, and won't you give him the difference?
No?
Well, how about a loan, he'll take your name and address . . . 

Figuring that their money would more likely go toward a bottle of Night Train Express, most people have little trouble saying no to propositions like this.
But healthy skepticism vanishes when they are solicited by an organized charity to help fight cancer, famine, child abuse, or what have you.
Most see little reason to doubt that their cash will go toward these noble goals.
But will it? 

In a distressing number of cases, no.
In fact, the donors sometimes might be better off giving the money to the panhandler: at least he has no overhead, and he might even be telling the truth. 

Last year, more than $100 billion was donated to the nation's 400,000 charities.
While the vast bulk of it was indeed spent by reputable organizations on the good works it was raised for, it's equally true that a sizable hunk was consumed in "expenses" claimed by other operators, including fraudulent expenses.
In many cases the costs claimed were so high that only a dribble of cash was left for the purported beneficiaries. 

It's impossible to say exactly how much of the total charity intake is devoured by stratospheric fund-raising costs, high-living operators, and downright fraud.
But the problem clearly is widespread and persistent.
State law enforcers can barely keep up with charity scams, and reports from watchdog groups such as the Council of Better Business Bureaus are not encouraging. 

The Philanthropic Advisory Service of the BBB reviews hundreds of new charities every year, measuring them against minimum standards for accountability; for accuracy and honesty in solicitation; and for percentage of funds actually going to work for which the charity was supposedly established.
The Service figures at least half of the money taken in should be spent on program.
Roughly a third of the charities reviewed flunk the test. 

Which, it should be added, doesn't prevent the charities from raking in a lot of money anyway.
Without a microscope and a subpoena, it's often hard to sort out worthwhile causes from ripoffs if all you've got to go on is the solicitation itself.
On this basis, "there's no way the average person can know a good charity from a bad one," says David Ormstedt, an assistant attorney general in Connecticut. "A lot of donors just get taken." 

Including those, he contends, who put about $1 million into the kitty for the Connecticut Association of Concerned Veterans and the Vietnam Veterans Service Center.
The state has sued these charities in state court, complaining that much of the money was grossly misspent; 82%, says Mr. Ormstedt, went to fund raisers and most of the rest to the people who ran the charities and to their relatives -- for fur coats, trips to Florida, Lucullan restaurant tabs.
The telephone number for the charity in Shelton, Conn., has been disconnected, and the former officials couldn't be located. 

Running a charity does cost money, but reputable organizations manage to get the lion's share of donations out to where they are really needed.
The Arthritis Foundation, the American Cancer Society and the United Way of America all say that they spend roughly 90% of their income on programs, not overhead.
With some other charities, however, its the other way around. 

The fledgling National Children's Cancer Society, for example, took in $2.5 million last year to finance bone-marrow transplants for children.
By the time it paid its expenses it only had $120,000 left -- not enough to treat even one child.
The state of Illinois is suing the charity for fraud in Chicago, along with Telesystems Marketing Inc., its Houston-based fund raiser. 

Both deny wrongdoing.
The charity admits spending a lot on fund raising, but says that was necessary to establish a donor base it can tap at much lower cost in years to come.
Michael Burns, president of Telesystems, says his concern has only benefited from the publicity surrounding the case, noting that three other charities have signed on as clients because they were impressed with the amount he raised for National Children's.
Meanwhile, a state court judge has allowed the charity to go on soliciting funds. 

Enforcers can't put charities out of business simply because they spend the lion's share of their income on fund raising.
State laws previously used as a yardstick minimum percentages of income -- usually half -- that had to be spent on the program rather than overhead, but these have been overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court.
It has ruled that such laws might work to stifle fund raising, which would amount to limiting the charities' first-amendment right to freedom of expression. 

This puts upon enforcers the burden of proving outright fraud or misrepresentation, and such actions have been brought against hundreds of charities recently.
The attorney general's office in Connecticut alone has put seven of them out of business over the past couple of years, and the enforcement drive is continuing there and elsewhere. 

In making cases, the authorities frequently zero in on alleged misrepresentations made by the charities' fund raisers.
Illinois, for instance, currently has under investigation 10 of the 30 companies drumming up funds for charities soliciting there. 

Enforcers pay special attention to operators using sweepstakes prizes as an additional inducement to give.
Attorneys general in several states, including Illinois, are already suing Watson & Hughey Co., an Alexandria, Va.-based outfit that they say has used deceptive sweepstakes ads to solicit donations for the American Heart Disease Foundation and the Cancer Fund of America. 

According to the Illinois attorney general's suit, Watson & Hughey sent mailings indicating that recipients were guaranteed cash prizes, and could win up to an additional $1,000 on top of them, if they contributed as little as $7.
But the total value of the prizes was only $5,000 and most "winners" will receive just 10 cents, according to the attorney general's office.
The suit is still pending in Illinois state court.
Watson & Hughey has denied the allegations in court; officials decline to comment further. 

While they can target some of the most obvious miscreants, enforcers concede that they are only scratching the surface.
There are so many cunning ploys used by so many dubious operators, they say, that it is probably impossible to stop them all. 

One maneuver: the "public education" gambit.
The solicitation material indicates that donations will go toward a campaign alerting and informing the public about some health or other issue.
What it doesn't say is that the entire "campaign" may be the fund-raising letter itself. 

"All too often this will merely be a statement on the solicitation such as, `Don't smoke!' or `Wear suntan lotion, ' " says William Webster, attorney general of Missouri. "By putting these pithy statements on the solicitations, hundreds of thousands of dollars are claimed to have been spent on education to consumers when in fact this represents the costs of sending the newsletters." 

Mr. Webster cites a four-page mailing from the United Cancer Council that offers a chance to win $5,000 in gold bullion to those giving as little as $5 to cancer education. "A few boilerplate warnings about cancer appear but that's only two inches in all four pages.
I think some people may believe they're helping fund a massive TV and print campaign, but we couldn't find that the charity does anything except write these letters," he says.
Officials at the Washington D.C.-based charity didn't return repeated phone calls. 

Many fly-by-night charities ride the coattails of the biggest, best-known and most reputable ones by adopting names similar to theirs.
The established charities are bothered by this but say they can do little about it. "We can't police the many organizations that have sprung up in the last few years using part of our name.
Most of them don't last for long, but in the meantime all we can do is tell people they aren't connected with us," says a spokeswoman for the American Heart Association.
And sometimes a reputable charity with a household name gets used and doesn't even know it.
A couple in Rockford, Ill., raised $12,591 earlier this year using the name and logo of Mothers Against Drunk Driving, without permission from the group.
MADD didn't learn of the fund raising until the couple sent it a check for $613, along with a letter saying that was the charity's "share." 

The Illinois Attorney General won a court order to prevent the couple from raising further funds without MADD's permission.
The couple couldn't be reached for comment and apparently have left Rockford, law enforcement officials report.
Denise McDonald, a spokeswoman for MADD, says, "It's scary, because anybody could do this."f 

Mr. Johnson is a staf reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Chicago bureau. 

Overhead costs at some of the largest charities, in millions of dollars 

Source: The NonProfit Times 

