.START 

Steel jackets of a type that may have prevented collapse of the columns of a 1.5-mile stretch of the Nimitz Freeway had been installed on at least a small test section of the double-decker highway last year by California's Department of Transportation, employees familiar with the project say. 

The test project -- which reportedly survived Tuesday's earthquake -- was a prelude to a state plan to retrofit that critical section of the freeway with the steel casings. 

State engineers have made a preliminary finding that it was failure of the concrete columns, wrenched and separated from the double-decker roadbed, that was responsible for the collapse. 

The failure in Oakland of the freeway segment known as the Cypress structure was the deadliest aspect of the quake, although officials were hopeful yesterday that the death toll there might be significantly lower than the 250 initially feared. 

Sorting out the wreckage is expected to take several days.
Red tractors gingerly picked at the rubble while jackhammers tried to break up some of the massive slabs of concrete.
Giant yellow cranes were wheeled up alongside the collapsed segment, preparing to lift off chunks of the debris. 

In Sacramento, a transportation department spokesman said he couldn't immediately confirm or deny existence of the test work.
However, he asserted that the department hadn't mastered the technology needed to retrofit the entire Cypress structure. 

Moreover, other officials noted, snafus in transportation funding that the state has experienced over the years may have restricted the availability of funds for such a retrofitting, even if it were technologically feasible. 

Knowledgeable employees said the retrofitting, which hadn't yet been budgeted, was part of a planned, three-stage reinforcement of the Cypress structure begun by the California transportation department several years ago.
The Cypress reinforcement project itself was part of an annual effort to shore up structures believed vulnerable to earthquakes.
The state began such work after a 1971 tremblor in Southern California, when numerous bridges collapsed. 

"We had just finished phase two" of the Cypress project that involved installing a series of retaining cables designed to prevent sections of the roadway from separating as a result of seismic shock, a state DOT engineer said.
After completing installation of the jackets on "one frame" of the freeway last year, the state DOT had sent the project over to its Sacramento engineers to draw up a final design. 

Knowledgeable employees said the project had been stymied somewhat by "the difficulty of designing" the jackets.
The procedure involves encasing the concrete columns with steel, then connecting them more securely to the double-decker roadbed. 

The employees also said the project may have been snagged by budgetary concerns.
One preliminary estimate put the retrofitting cost at as much as $50 million. 

The collapse of the span has provoked surprise and anger among state officials.
Gov. George Deukmejian, who said he had been assured by state transportation officials that the structure could withstand an even larger quake, called for an immediate investigation. 

"I want to know who made the decision that it was safe for 186,000 people to use every day," said Richard Katz, a state legislator who is chairman of the California Assembly's transportation committee.
He said he would convene hearings within two weeks. 

The Cypress structure opened in June 1957, and as such, like many buildings in the San Francisco Bay area, does not meet current building codes requiring considerably more steel support.
The northern piers of the span lie in estuarian deposits that were of a type to have liquefied easily during the 1906 quake. 

Transportation department officials, however, said they were as surprised as anyone by the Cypress destruction.
They said previous earthquakes suggested that multiple-column viaducts would stand up well, although they were working on ways to bolster them. 

"Unfortunately, there is only one laboratory for developing techniques to withstand earthquakes, and that is an earthquake," said Burch Bachtold, San Francisco district director for the transportation department. 

He said: "We know of no technology that exists anywhere in the world that would allow us to" reinforce the columns. 

