.START 

WALL STREET, SHAKE hands with George Orwell. 

The author of the futuristic novel "1984" invented a language called Newspeak that made it impossible to fully develop a heretical thought -- that is, anything negative about the policies and practices of the state.
Wall Street hasn't gotten that far yet, but it has made a promising start. 

Its language -- call it Streetspeak -- is increasingly mellifluous, reassuring, and designed to make financial products and maneuvers appear better, safer or cheaper than they really are.
When something undeniably nasty happens, a few euphemisms are deployed to simply make it disappear, much as a fresh grave may be covered by a blanket of flowers. 

For example, we'll bet you thought that the stock market crashed two years ago.
Wrong.
According to some of the grand panjandrums of the market, it never happened.
In their lexicon the 508-point collapse in the Dow Jones Industrial Average on Oct. 19, 1987, was just a big blip.
Trotting out a much-beloved Streetspeak term, New York Stock Exchange Chairman John Phelan recently declared that history would record the event as only "a major technical correction." 

(Another much-beloved saying, however, this one in plain English, holds that if something walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is a duck.
On Oct. 29, 1929 -- a date historians stubbornly insist on associating with the dreaded C-word -- the DJ industrials fell 12.8%.
In the "technical correction" of two years ago, they lost a whopping 22.6%.) 

Customers hear a lot of this stuff from people who try to sell them stock.
These people used to be called brokers, but apparently this word either is not grandiose enough or carries too many negative connotations from the aforementioned technical correction, when terrified customers couldn't raise brokers on the phone.
Either way, the word "broker" is clearly out of favor. 

Of the major New York-based securities firms, only Morgan Stanley & Co. still calls its salespeople brokers.
At Merrill Lynch & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., they are "financial consultants." At Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Prudential Bache Securities, and Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., they are "account executives." At PaineWebber Inc., they are "investment executives." 

Such titles are designed to convey a sense of dignified, broad-scale competence and expertise in selling today's myriad financial products.
It is a competence and expertise that some brokers themselves, overwhelmed by all the new things being dreamed up for them to peddle, don't feel. "Its almost product de jour," grouses one account executive at Dean Witter. 

The transmogrified brokers never let the C-word cross their lips, instead stressing such terms as "safe," "insured" and "guaranteed" -- even though these terms may be severely limited in their application to a particular new financial product.
The names of some of these products don't suggest the risk involved in buying them, either. 

A case in point: "government-plus" bond funds.
What could imply more safety than investing in government bonds?
What could be better than getting a tad more income from them (the plus) than other people?
Indeed, conservative investors, many of them elderly, have poured more than $50 billion into such funds, which promise fatter yields than ordinary Treasury bonds -- only to learn later that these funds use part of their money to dabble in high-risk bond options, a gambler's game. 

When a certain class of investment performs so poorly that its reputation is tarnished, look for Wall Street to give it a new moniker.
This seems to be happening now to limited partnerships, many of which either have gone into the tank in recent years or have otherwise been grievous disappointments.
They are still being sold, but more and more often as "direct investments" -- with all the same risks they had under the old label. 

In such cases, the game hasn't changed, only the name.
In others a familiar old name still prevails, but the underlying game has changed.
For example, "no load" mutual funds remain a favorite with investors because they don't carry a frontend sales commission.
Getting out of them, however, may be a different story now. 

Traditional no-loads made their money by charging an annual management fee, usually a modest one; they imposed no other fees, and many still don't.
In recent years, though, a passel of others flying the no-load flag have been imposing hefty charges -- all the way up to 6% -- when an investor sells his shares.
Shouldn't they properly be called exit-load funds?
The mutual-fund industry is debating the question, but don't expect a new name while the old one is working so well. 

And don't expect anyone to change the term "blue chip," either, even though some of the companies that still enjoy the title may be riskier investments than they were.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co., for one, is still a favorite of widows, orphans and trust departments -- but shorn of its regional telephone units and exposed to competition on every side, it is a far different investment prospect than it was before divestiture. 

Also, blue chips in general have suffered much more short-term price volatility in recent years.
Larry Biehl, a money manager in San Mateo, Calif., blames that on the advent of program trading, in which computers used by big institutional investors are programmed to buy and sell big blocks when certain market conditions prevail.
Blue chips, he says, "are now being referred to as poker chips." 

Finally, even the time-honored strategy called "value investing" no longer means what it once did.
Before the takeover mania of the '80s, it referred to rooting out through analysis undervalued stocks, especially those with shrewd management, sound fundamentals and decent prospects.
Now, says Mr. Biehl, value investing often means "looking for downtrodden companies with terrible management that are in real trouble." To institutional investors or brokers, he adds, a company with value is a company at risk of being swallowed up. 

Ms. Bettner covers personal finance from The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau. 

