.START 

IF YOU FORCE financial planners to sum up their most important advice in a single sentence, it would probably be a one-word sentence: Diversify. 

Judging by a poll of Wall Street Journal readers conducted this summer by Erdos & Morgan Inc., serious investors have taken that advice to heart.
Nearly 1,000 investors responded to the Journal's poll, providing an in-depth look at their portfolios. 

Those portfolios are remarkably diversified.
By spreading their wealth among several investment alternatives, the respondents have protected themselves against squalls in any one area, be it stocks, bonds or real estate. 

For example, about 88% of Journal readers owned stock (down slightly from 91% in a similar poll last year).
But only 17.5% said they had more than half their money in the stock market. 

Similarly, 57% of respondents own shares in a money-market mutual fund, and 33% own municipal bonds.
But only 6% to 7% of the investors were committing more than half their funds to either of those alternatives. 

The poll, conducted Aug. 7-28, also provides a glimpse into the thinking of serious investors on a variety of other topics.
It found them in a cautious, but not downbeat, mood. 

Of 1,500 people sent a questionnaire, 951 replied.
The response rate, more than 63%, allows the results to be interpreted with a high degree of confidence.
The results can't be extrapolated to all investors, though.
Journal readers are relatively affluent, with a median household income of between $75,000 and $99,000.
Nearly half of the respondents (47%) said their investment portfolio was worth $250,000 or more, and 17% said it was worth $1 million or more. 

The respondents were mildly optimistic about the economy and investment markets, but their collective judgments were a notch more sober than they were a year ago. 

For example, 12% of this year's respondents said they expect a recession within 12 months.
Last year, only 8% were expecting a recession. 

An additional 56% of this year's respondents expect the economy to slow down during the next 12 months.
Only 42% of last year's respondents anticipated slowing growth. 

Apparently, the respondents don't think that an economic slowdown would harm the major investment markets very much.
A slim majority (51%) think stock prices will be higher in August 1990 than they were in August 1989. 

Their verdict on real estate is almost the same.
Some 50% expect real estate in their local area to increase in value over the next 12 months. 

By contrast, only 32% expect an increase in the price of gold.
Since gold tends to soar when inflation is high, that finding suggests that people believe inflation remains under control. 

Even though only 12% actually predicted a recession, many respondents were taking a better-safe-than sorry investment stance.
Nearly a third said they have made some portfolio changes to anticipate a possible recession.
For the most part, the changes were "slight." 

The two-thirds who haven't tried to make their portfolios more recession-resistant were split about evenly between investors who "don't believe in trying to predict the markets" (about 31%) and investors who "don't expect a recession" (about 15%) or are "unsure if and when a recession might come" (about 22%). 

A buy-and-hold approach to stocks continues to be the rule among respondents.
Most own two to 10 stocks, and buy or sell no more than three times a year.
Some 71% had bought some stock in the past year; only 57% had sold any. 

But the lurking shadow of 1987's stock-market crash still seems dark.
About 33% considered another crash "likely," while about 63% said one is "unlikely." Those percentages hardly changed from the previous year's poll. 

And the respondents' commitment to the stock market remains somewhat lighter than usual.
About 60% of them said they would "ordinarily" have at least 25% of their money in stocks.
But as of August, only 50% actually had stock-market investments of that size. 

Most stock-market indexes were hitting all-time highs at around the time of the poll.
But it appears that many Journal readers were taking that news as a sign to be cautious, rather than a signal to jump on the bandwagon. 

Mr. Dorfman covers investing issues from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. 

