.START 

Domestic lending for real estate and property development was the source of Bank Bumiputra Malaysia Bhd. 's most recent spate of financial troubles, the institution's executive chairman, Mohamed Basir Ismail, said. 

Speaking to reporters this week after Bank Bumiputra's shareholders approved a rescue plan, Tan Sri Basir said heavy lending to the property sector rocked the bank when property prices in Malaysia plummeted in 1984-85. 

He said the bank couldn't wait any longer for prices to recover and for borrowers to service their loans.
So the bank's board decided to make 1.23 billion Malaysian dollars (US$457 million) in provisions for interest payments from loans previously recorded as revenue but never actually received by the bank, and to submit a bailout package to replenish the bank's paid-up capital. 

The predicament, he added, was similar to the Hong Kong 1982-83 property-price collapse, which exposed the involvement of Bank Bumiputra's former subsidiary in the colony in the largest banking scandal in Malaysia's history.
The subsidiary, Bumiputra Malaysia Finance Ltd., was left with M$2.26 billion in bad loans made to Hong Kong property speculators. 

Both episodes wiped out Bank Bumiputra's shareholders' funds.
Each time, the bank's 90% shareholder -- Petroliam Nasional Bhd., or Petronas, the national oil company -- has been called upon to rescue the institution.
In five years, Petronas, which became the dominant shareholder in a 1984 rescue exercise, has spent about M$3.5 billion to prop up the troubled bank. 

Tan Sri Basir said the capital restructuring plan has been approved by Malaysia's Capital Issues Committee and central bank.
Malaysia's High Court is expected to approve the plan. 

Once the plan is approved, Tan Sri Basir said, most of Bank Bumiputra's nonperforming loans will have been fully provided for and the bank will be on track to report a pretax profit of between M$160 million and M$170 million for the fiscal year ending March 31.
For the previous financial year, the bank would have reported a pretax profit of M$168 million if it hadn't made provisions for the nonperforming loans, he said. 

Malaysia's Banking Secrecy Act prohibited the bank from identifying delinquent borrowers, said Tan Sri Basir.
But public documents indicate 10% or more of the bank's provisions were made for foregone interest on a M$200 million loan to Malaysia's dominant political party, the United Malays National Organization, to build its convention and headquarters complex in Kuala Lumpur.
The loan to UMNO was made in September 1983. 

"We lent a lot of money all over the place," said Tan Sri Basir, who refused to discuss the bank's outstanding loans to 

As well as the M$1.23 billion in provisions announced on Oct. 6, the restructuring package covers an additional M$450 million in provisions made in earlier years but never reflected in a reduction of the bank's paid-up capital.
At the end of the exercise, the cash injection from Petronas will increase the bank's paid-up capital to M$1.15 billion after virtually being wiped out by the new provisions. 

