.START 

New York Times Co. 's third-quarter earnings report is reinforcing analysts' belief that newspaper publishers will be facing continued poor earnings comparisons through 1990. 

The publisher was able to register soaring quarter net income because of a onetime gain on the sale of its cable-TV system.
However, operating profit fell 35% to $16.4 million.
The decline reflected the expense of buying three magazines, lower earnings from the forest-products group, and what is proving to be a nagging major problem, continued declines in advertising linage at the New York Times, the company's flagship daily newspaper. 

In composite trading on the American Stock Exchange, New York Times closed at $28.125 a share, down 37.5 cents. 

Analysts said the company's troubles mirror those of the industry.
Retail advertising, which often represents half of the advertising volume at most daily newspapers, largely isn't rebounding in the second half from extended doldrums as expected.
At the same time, newspapers are bedeviled by lagging national advertising, especially in its financial component.
Dow Jones & Co. recently reported net fell 9.9%, a reflection, in part, of continued softness in financial advertising at The Wall Street Journal and Barron's magazine. 

"We expect next year to be a fairly soft year in newspaper-industry advertising," said John Morton, an analyst for Lynch, Jones & Ryan. "Next year, earnings will hold steady, but we just don't see a big turnaround in the trend in advertising." 

John S. Reidy, an analyst for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., said, "The Times faces the same problem of other publishers: linage is down.
It will be hard to do handstands until real linage starts heading back up." 

In the quarterly report, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, New York Times Co. chairman and chief executive officer, said negative factors affecting third-quarter earnings will continue.
Analysts agreed with company expectations that operating profit will be down this year and in 1990.
Mr. Sulzberger said the scheduled opening of a new color-printing plant in Edison, N.J., in 1990 would involve heavy startup and depreciation costs. 

"With the Edison plant coming on line next summer, the Times is facing some tough earnings comparison in the future," said Peter Appert, an analyst with C.J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell. "But many newspapers are facing similar comparisons." 

The sale of the company's cable franchise brought an after-tax gain of $193.3 million, part of which will be used to reduce debt.
The company also has a stock-repurchase plan. 

Analysts said they were impressed by the performance of the company's newspaper group, which consists of the Times, 35 regional newspapers and a one-third interest in the International Herald Tribune; group operating profit for the quarter increased slightly to $34.9 million from $34.5 million on flat revenue. 

Drexel Burnham's Mr. Reidy pointed out that "profits held up in a tough revenue environment.
That's a good sign when profits are stable during a time revenue is in the trough." 

