.START 

Business and civic operations lurched back toward normalcy here as congressional officials estimated that the price tag for emergency assistance to earthquake-ravaged California would total at least $2.5 billion. 

"That is a minimum figure, and I underscore minimum," said House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) after conferring with California lawmakers. "It's impossible to put an exact figure on it at this time." 

The Office of Management and Budget has begun looking into legislation to provide more funds for earthquake repairs.
And California's 45-member delegation in the House is expected to propose that emergency funds be added to a stop-gap spending bill that the House Appropriations Committee is to consider Monday. 

For the most part, major corporations' headquarters and plants were unaffected or only slightly damaged by Tuesday's earthquake, which registered 6.9 on the Richter scale.
One of the last big employers in the Silicon Valley to report in, Seagate Technology, said it expects to be back at full strength Monday.
The day before the quake, Seagate completed three days of emergency training and drills. 

Echoing the response of almost all big corporations in the Bay Area, Don Waite, Seagate's chief financial officer, said, "I wouldn't expect this to have any significant financial impact." 

The city's recovery from the earthquake was uneven.
Banks indicated they were operating at greater than 90% of their usual capacity, but a Nob Hill hotel said tourists had fled, leaving the previously full hotel with an 80% vacancy rate.
City crews tallied the wreckage to buildings, but lacked a clear sense of how gravely transportation arteries were disabled.
Among the city's banks, Bank of America said all but eight of its 850 branches were open.
The closed branches, in San Francisco, Hayward, Santa Clara and Santa Cruz, sustained structural damage.
Power failures kept just seven of its 1,500 automated-teller machines off-line.
Securities-trading operations were moved to Bank of America's Concord office, and foreign-exchange trading operations were shifted to Los Angeles, the bank said. 

Wells Fargo & Co. said its Emergency Operations Committee -- which met all night Tuesday -- moved its global-funds transfer system to El Monte, Calif., 500 miles to the south.
Only five of 496 branches statewide remain closed, while 23 of 600 automated-teller machines remained out of order. 

The most extensive damage was in small towns near the quake's epicenter, 80 miles south of San Francisco.
Santa Cruz County estimates total damage at nearly $600 million.
Santa Clara County has a running total so far of $504 million, excluding the hard-hit city of Los Gatos. 

Oakland officials were still uncertain about the magnitude of structural damage late yesterday; a section of I-880, a twotiered highway, collapsed in Oakland, causing a majority of the deaths resulting from the quake. 

San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos estimated that damages to the city total $2 billion.
That includes dwellings in the ravaged Marina district that must be demolished, peeled business facades south of Market Street, and houses in the city's outer Richmond district that were heaved off their foundations.
Many streets and sidewalks buckled, and subterranean water mains and service connections ruptured. 

The federal funds would go to a range of programs, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency, highway construction accounts and the Small Business Administration, according to Rep. Vic Fazio (D., Calif.). 

FEMA, which coordinates federal disaster relief, is already strapped by the costs of cleaning up after Hurricane Hugo, which hit the Carolinas last month.
It is likely to get as much as $800 million initially in additional funds, and eventually could get more than $1 billion, according to Mr. Fazio, a member of the House Appropriations Committee. 

White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said there is enough money on hand to deal with immediate requirements.
The Bush administration has at its disposal $273 million in funds remaining from the $1.1 billion Congress released for the cleanup after Hurricane Hugo. 

"We feel we have the money necessary to handle the immediate, short-term requirements," Mr. Fitzwater said.
He added that the Office of Management and Budget, the Transportation Department and other agencies are "developing longer-term legislation" that should be ready soon. 

Much of the cost of cleaning up after the earthquake will involve repairing highways and bridges.
California lawmakers are seeking changes in rules governing the federal highway relief program so more money can be made available for the state. 

Some things can't be repaired.
The Asian Art Museum in Golden Gate Park reports $10 million to $15 million in damage, including shattered porcelains and stone figures.
Its neighbor, the De Young Museum, totaled $3 million to $5 million in structural damage and shattered sculpture. 

The city's main library is closed because of fissures that opened in its walls, and marble facings and ornamental plaster at the Beaux Arts City Hall broke off in the temblor. 

The ground along the Embarcaderothe street that skirts the city's eastern boundary and piers -- dropped six inches after the quake, wreaking major damage to at least one of the piers.
At San Francisco International Airport, shock waves wrecked the control tower, knocking down computers and shattering glass.
Offices of the city's Rent Board were destroyed. 

Mayor Agnos's $2 billion estimate doesn't include damage to freeway arteries leading into the city, some of which remained closed.
A major chunk of the $2 billion is expected to be eaten up by overtime for city workers deployed in the emergency, said a spokesman for Mr. Agnos. "All of the city's $5.9 million emergency reserve was spent in the first 24 hours" on overtime salaries, he said. 

Insurers struggled to to get a firm grasp on the volume of claims pouring into their offices. 

At Fireman's Fund Corp., a spokesman said 142 claims were received in the first 24 hours after the quake, and the company is braced for as many as 5,000 claims from its 35,000 residential and 35,000 business policyholders in the affected area. 

"Claims range from a scratched fender -- and there were an awful lot of cars damaged in this -- to a major processing plant," a spokesman said. "We're delivering a check for $750,000 to an automotive business in Berkeley that burned on Tuesday." 

Fireman's is part of a $38 million syndicate that supplies business interruption insurance to the city on the Bay Bridge, which must pay employees during the three weeks or more it is expected to be out of service and deprived of toll income. 

California lawmakers want to eliminate temporarily a $100 million cap on the amount of federal highway relief for each state for each disaster, as well as a prohibition on using the emergency highway aid to repair toll roads. 

In addition, under the highway-relief program, the federal government provides 100% of emergency highway aid for only the first 90 days of a repair effort.
After that, the federal share diminishes.
For interstate highways, the federal share normally would drop to 90% of the cost of repairs, and the state would have to pick up the remainder of the cost.
But lawmakers want to extend the period for 100% federal funding for several months. 

Those changes also would apply to two areas hit hard by Hurricane Hugo -- South Carolina and the U.S. Virgin Islands, according to an aide to Rep. Fazio. 

Meanwhile, the FEMA announced a toll-free telephone number (800-462-9029) to expedite service to victims of the earthquake.
Lines will be available 24 hours a day to take applications for such disaster relief as temporary housing and emergency home repairs by phone. 

Transportation officials are expecting utter traffic pandemonium beginning Monday and growing worse over the next several weeks.
Some 250,000 cars normally cross the closed Bay Bridge between Oakland and San Francisco daily.
Officials say it is clear that alternate routes can't handle the overflow. 

The state is calling in a flotilla of navy landing vessels and other boats to expand ferry service across the bay and hopes to add numerous new bus routes and train departures to help alleviate the traffic problem.
Moreover, state officials are urging freight haulers to bypass many of the area's main highways and to travel late at night or during predawn hours.
Even so, "We're looking for chaos," said George Gray, a deputy district director at the California Department of Transportation. "If there's any way you can do it, you ought to go to Idaho and go fishing for a while." 

Most of San Francisco's tourists and business travelers already have left -- despite hotel's offers of rate cuts. "Everyone left," said Peter Lang, reservations manager of the Mark Hopkins Hotel. 

The Westin St. Francis hotel, which survived the 1906 earthquake and fire, currently is less than 50% occupied. "We still have our die-hard baseball fans," a spokesman said. "One lady from New York said she's not going home until the {World Series} is over." 

Gerald F. Seib and Joe Davidson in Washington contributed to this article. 

