.START 

What's in a name?
Apparently a lot, according to the British firm of Deloitte, Haskins & Sells. 

The British firm has begun court proceedings in London to prevent the use of the name "Deloitte" by Deloitte, Haskins & Sells and Touche Ross & Co. in England and the rest of the world.
The British Deloitte firm recently withdrew from the merger of Deloitte and Touche world-wide and joined Coopers & Lybrand. 

John Bullock, senior partner of Deloitte in the U.K., said "the decision to start these proceedings hasn't been taken lightly." Mr. Bullock said the British firm has used the name "Deloitte" since 1845.
In the U.S., Deloitte, Haskins & Sells was known as Haskins & Sells until 1978, when it added the "Deloitte" name of its British affiliate. 

John C. Burton, an accounting professor at Columbia University's Graduate School of Business, said "there's a lot of emotion involved in the name of an accounting firm with a long history and with roots in England, where accounting predates the U.S." Although accountants aren't noted as "being deeply emotional, they really hold it all in," said Mr. Burton, former chief accountant of the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

J. Michael Cook, chairman of Deloitte, Haskins & Sells International, said he believes the legal action by the British firm "to be without merit." Mr. Cook said that last June, the international executive committes of Deloitte and Touche agreed to a world-wide merger. "The merger is proceeding according to plan, except as to the withdrawal of the Deloitte U.K. firm," he said. 

Partners at other accounting firms say that the Deloitte firm in the U.K. is filing the suit to get even with the merged Deloitte-Touche firm for keeping major auditing work in England.
General Motors Corp., a Deloitte audit client, for example, has agreed to keep its annual $18 million world-wide audit and associated tax work with the merged Deloitte-Touche firm, to be known as Deloitte & Touche in the U.S.
In England, this would mean that the British Deloitte would lose revenue for its audit of GM's Vauxhill unit. 

The defection of Deloitte's affiliates in Britain and the Netherlands to Coopers & Lybrand will make Coopers one of the biggest accounting firms in Europe, rivaling KPMG Peat Marwick there.
Although Coopers hasn't been courted by other major accounting firms for a merger, it is benefiting greatly from fallout from the Deloitte-Touche merger. 

In New York, Harris Amhowitz, general counsel of Coopers, said Coopers "was aware of the litigation," but he declined further comment.
He also declined to comment on the name that Coopers would use in England if Deloitte UK won its litigation to keep its name.
Coopers uses the Coopers & Lybrand name world-wide. 

