.START 

A House-Senate conference approved a nearly $17 billion State, Justice and Commerce Department bill that makes federal reparations for Japanese-Americans held in World War II internment camps a legal entitlement after next Oct. 1. 

The measure provides no money for the promised payments until then, but beginning in fiscal 1991, the government would be committed to meeting annual payments of as much as $500 million until the total liability of approximately $1.25 billion is paid.
The action abandons earlier efforts to find offsetting cuts to fund the payments, but is widely seen as a more realistic means of expediting reparations first authorized in 1988. 

The action came as Congress sent to President Bush a fiscal 1990 bill providing an estimated $156.7 billion for the Departments of Labor, Education, Health and Human Services.
Final approval was on a 67-31 roll call in the Senate, which sets the stage for a veto confrontation with Mr. Bush over the issue of publicly financed abortions for poor women. 

Reversing an eight-year federal policy, the measure supports Medicaid abortions in cases of rape and incest, but Mr. Bush has so far refused to support any specific exemption beyond instances in which the mother's life is in danger.
Mr. Bush's veto power puts him a commanding position in the narrowly divided House, but a vote to override his position could well pick up new support because of the wealth of health and education programs financed in the underlying bill. 

The measure before the conference yesterday funds the Departments of State, Justice and Commerce through fiscal 1990.
An estimated $1.32 billion is provided for next year's census, and negotiators stripped a Senate-passed rider seeking to block the counting of illegal aliens. 

Elsewhere in the Commerce Department, nearly $191.2 million is preserved for assistance programs under the Economic Development Administration.
And in a footnote to the fall of House Speaker James Wright this year, the conference voted to rescind $11.8 million in unspent EDA funds for a Fort Worth, Texas, stockyards project that figured in ethics charges against the former Democratic leader. 

Fiscal pressures also forced the adoption of new fees charged by federal agencies, and an 18% increase in the Securities and Exchange Commission's budget would be financed entirely by an added $26 million in filing fees.
In an unprecedented step, the measure anticipates another $30 million in receipts by having the Federal Bureau of Investigation charge for fingerprint services in civil cases -- a change that is almost certain to increase Pentagon costs in processing personnel and security clearances. 

The bill doesn't include an estimated $1.9 billion in supplemental anti-drug funds for Justice Department and law-enforcement accounts that are still in conference with the House.
But yesterday's agreement would make it easier for state governments to handle the promised aid by deferring for one year a scheduled 50% increase in the required state matching funds for law-enforcement grants. 

Similarly, the measure adjusts the current funding formula to promise smaller states such as New Hampshire and Delaware a minimum allocation of $1.6 million each in drug grants, or three times the current minimum. 

The odd mix of departments in the bill makes it one of the more eclectic of the annual appropriations measures, and the assorted provisions attached by lawmakers run from $1.5 million for a fish farm in Arkansas to a music festival in Moscow under the United States Information Agency.
Lawmakers scrapped all of a $7.4 million State Department request for the 1992 Expo in Seville, Spain, but agreed elsewhere to $15,000 for an oil portrait of former Chief Justice Warren Burger. 

Senate Commerce Committee Chairman Ernest Hollings (D., S.C.), who also chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee for the department, attached $10 million for an advanced technology initiative, including work on high-definition television.
His Republican counterpart, Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), has used his position to wage a legislative war with the conservative board of the Legal Services Corp. 

An estimated $321 million is provided to maintain the program, but Mr. Rudman also succeeded in attaching language seeking to curb the authority of the current board until new members are confirmed.
The effective date of any new regulations by the current board would be delayed until Oct. 1 next year, and the bill seeks to reverse efforts by the corporation to cut off funds to service organizations such as the Food Research and Action Center. 

The bill also provides $620.5 million to meet U.S. contributions to international organizations and $80 million for peace-keeping activities.
Both accounts reflect significant increases from fiscal 1989, although the amount for peace-keeping shows a 27% cut from the administration's request. 

