.START 

B.A.T Industries PLC won overwhelming shareholder approval for a defensive restructuring to fend off a #13.35 billion ($21.23 billion) takeover bid from Sir James Goldsmith. 

At a shareholders' meeting in London, the tobacco, financial-services and retailing giant said it received 99.9% approval from voting holders for plans to spin off about $6 billion in assets. 

B.A.T aims to sell such U.S. retailing units as Marshall Field and Saks Fifth Avenue and float its big paper and British retailing businesses via share issues to existing holders.
Proceeds will help pay for a planned buy-back of 10%, or about 153 million, of its shares and a 50% dividend increase. 

B.A.T yesterday started its share buy-back.
The company said it acquired 2.5 million shares for 785 pence ($12.48) each, or a total of #19.6 million ($31.2 million), from its broker, Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
The share buy-back plan is likely to underpin B.A.T's share price. 

B.A.T said it may make more equity purchases until the close of business today, depending on market conditions, but will cease further purchases until Nov. 22, when it releases third-quarter results. 

B.A.T shares rose 29 pence to 783 pence on London's stock exchange yesterday. 

Shareholder approval sets the stage for a lengthy process of restructuring that might not be completed until next year's second half.
Before the recent tumult in global financial markets, B.A.T officials, holders and analysts had expected a substantial part of the restructuring to be complete by the end of the first half. 

"We are not in any hurry to sell" Saks, Marshall Field or B.A.T's other U.S. retail properties, said Chairman Patrick Sheehy. "This isn't a distress sale.
We are determined to get good prices." 

Company officials say the flotations of the paper and British retailing businesses are likely only after the disposals of the U.S. retailing assets. 

Meanwhile, Sir James still is pursuing efforts to gain U.S. insurance regulators' approval for a change in control of B.A.T's Farmers Group Inc. unit.
The Anglo-French financier has indicated he intends to bid again for B.A.T if he receives approval. 

