.START 

The disarray in the junk-bond market that began last month with a credit crunch at Campeau Corp. has offered commercial banks a golden opportunity to play a greater role in financing billion-dollar takeovers. 

But two big New York banks seem to have kicked those chances away, for the moment, with the embarrassing failure of Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp. to deliver $7.2 billion in bank financing for a leveraged buy-out of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. 

For more than a decade, banks have been pressing Congress and banking regulators for expanded powers to act like securities firms in playing Wall Street's lucrative takeover game, from giving mergers advice all the way to selling and trading high-yield junk bonds. 

Those expanded powers reached their zenith in July when Bankers Trust New York Corp. provided mergers advice, an equity investment and bank loans for the $3.65 billion leveraged buy-out of Northwest Airlines parent NWA Inc. 

One of the major selling points used by Los Angeles financier Alfred Checchi in getting the takeover approved was that the deal didn't include any junk bonds.
That was seen as an advantage in lobbying airline employees and Washington regulators for approval of the contested takeover.
All $3.35 billion in debt for the deal was supplied by banks. 

Charles Nathan, co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Salomon Brothers Inc., says it is natural for banks to try to expand beyond their bread-and-butter business of providing senior debt for buy-outs.
But the UAL collapse, he says, "may tell you it's not going to work that easily." 

David Batchelder, a mergers adviser in La Jolla, Calif., who aided Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis on the bids which put both UAL and NWA in play as takeover candidates this year, says that banks have been "preparing to play a larger and larger role in acquisition financing." 

Mr. Batchelder says that in the past, banks would normally have loaned 65% of a total buy-out price, with the loans secured by the target company's assets.
Another 20% of the borrowed funds would come from the sale to investors of junk bonds, which offer less security and typically carry higher yields than bank loans.
Mr. Checchi's purchase of NWA, Mr. Batchelder notes, "was probably the most aggressive to date," with bank debt at 85% of the purchase price. 

But Mr. Batchelder says that Citicorp's "failure to deliver" on its promise to raise the UAL bank debt for a labor-management buy-out group "is very distressing to potential users of a `highly-confident' letter from commercial banks." His client, Mr. Davis, used just such a letter from Citicorp in pursuing UAL; Citicorp later agreed to work with a competing UAL buy-out group. 

Executives of Citicorp and Chase Manhattan declined to comment on either the UAL situation, or on the changing nature of banks' role in financing takeovers. 

In the wake of Campeau's problems, prices of junk bonds tumbled, throwing into doubt the ability of corporate acquirers to finance large takeovers with the help of junk bond sales. 

Mark Solow, senior managing director at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co., says the falloff in junk bonds may yet open new business opportunities to banks in structuring takeovers.
But he warns that banks will have "to have enough discipline" not to make loans that are too risky. 

In fact, Manufacturers Hanover said in its third-quarter earnings report that fees from syndicating loans to other banks dropped 48%, to $21 million. "We didn't take part in a lot of deals because their credit quality was poor," says a bank spokesman. 

James B. Lee, head of syndications and private placements at Chemical Banking Corp., said he believes banks can still make a credible offer of one-stop shopping for takeover finance.
As evidence, he cites yesterday's arrangement for the final financing of a $3 billion bid for American Medical International Inc. in which Chemical served as both the lead bank and an equity investor. 

Beyond the current weakness in the junk bond market, banks have another advantage over investment banks in financing contested takeovers.
Arthur Fleischer Jr., a takeover lawyer at Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson, notes that "a political and emotional bias" has developed against junk bonds. 

One hostile bidder who deliberately avoided using junk bonds was Paramount Communications Inc. in its initial offer to acquire Time Inc. for $10.7 billion, or $175 a share.
A Paramount spokesman says that decision was based on the financial, not political, drawbacks of junk bonds. 

But some observers believe Paramount Chairman Martin Davis wanted to avoid the possible taint of being perceived as a corporate raider in his controversial bid for Time.
In the end, Mr. Davis used junk bonds so that he could raise Paramount's bid to $200 a share.
Some Monday-morning quarterbacks said the initial lower bid, without junk bonds, was a factor in his losing the company.
Time eluded Paramount by acquiring Warner Communications Inc. 

The success of the NWA financing, and the failure of the UAL deal, also seem to highlight the important new role in takeover financing being played by Japanese banks. 

Japanese banks accounted for 50% of the NWA bank debt, according to a report by Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner.
But it was broad-scale rejection by Japanese banks that helped seal the fate of the attempt to buy UAL. Citicorp and Chase are attempting to put together a new, lower bid. 

Takanori Mizuno, chief economist of the Institute for Financial Affairs Inc., a Tokyo research center on finance and economics, says, "The junk bond market became very jittery, and there's a fear of a coming recession and the possible bankruptcy of LBO companies.
These factors have combined to deter LBO lending by Japanese banks." provided solely by banks, not high-yield junk bonds 

