.START 

They didn't play the third game of the World Series on Tuesday night as scheduled, and they didn't play it on Wednesday or Thursday either.
But you knew that, didn't you? 

They are supposed to play the game next Tuesday, in Candlestick Park here.
The theory is that the stadium, damaged by Tuesday's earthquake, will be repaired by then, and that people will be able to get there.
Like just about everything else, that remains to be seen.
Aftershocks could intervene.
But, at least, the law of averages should have swung to the favorable side. 

It may seem trivial to worry about the World Series amid the destruction to the Bay Area wrought by Tuesday's quake, but the name of this column is "On Sports," so I feel obliged to do so.
You might be interested to know that baseball, not survival, appeared to be the first thought of most of the crowd of 60,000-odd that had gathered at Candlestick at 5:04 p.m. Tuesday, a half-hour before game time, when the quake struck.
As soon as the tremor passed, many people spontaneously arose and cheered, as though it had been a novel kind of pre-game show. 

One fan, seated several rows in front of the open, upper-deck auxiliary press section where I was stationed, faced the assembled newsies and laughingly shouted, "We arranged that just for you guys!" I thought and, I'm sure, others did: "You shouldn't have bothered." 

I'd slept through my only previous brush with natural disaster, a tornado 15 or so summers ago near Traverse City, Mich., so I was unprepared for one reaction to such things: the urge to talk about them.
Perhaps primed by the daily diet of radio and TV reporters thrusting microphones into people's faces and asking how they "feel" about one calamity or another, fellow reporters and civilians who spied my press credential were eager to chat. 

"It felt like I was on a station platform and a train went by," said one man, describing my own reaction.
A women said she saw the park's light standards sway.
A man said he saw the upper rim undulate.
I saw neither. 

Dictates of good sense to the contrary not withstanding, the general inclination was to believe that the disturbance would be brief and that ball would be played. "I was near the top of the stadium, and saw a steel girder bow six feet from where I sat, but I stayed put for 10 or 15 minutes," confessed a friend. "I guess I thought, `This is the World Series and I'm not gonna wimp out!'" 

Here in the Global Village, though, folks do not stay uninformed for long.
Electrical power was out in still-daylighted Candlestick Park, but battery-operated radios and television sets were plentiful.
Within a few minutes, the true extent of the catastrophe was becoming clear.
Its Richter Scale measurement was reported as 6.5, then 6.9, then 7.0.
A section of the Bay Bridge had collapsed, as had a part of Interstate Highway 880 in Oakland.
People had died. 

At 5:40 p.m., scheduled game time having passed, some fans chanted "Let's Play Ball." No longer innocent, they qualified as fools.
The stadium was ordered evacuated soon afterward; the announcement, made over police bullhorns, cited the power outage, but it later was revealed that there also had been damage of the sort reported by my friend.
Outside, I spotted two young men lugging blocks of concrete. "Pieces of Candlestick," they said. 

The crowd remained good natured, even bemused.
TV reporters interviewed fans in the parking lots while, a few feet away, others watched the interviews on their portable TVs.
The only frenzy I saw was commercial: Booths selling World Series commemorative stamps and dated postmarks were besieged by fledgling speculators who saw future profit in the items. 

The traffic jam out of the park was monumental.
It took me a half-hour to move 10 feet from my parking spot in an outer lot to an aisle, and an additional hour to reach an inner roadway a half-block away.
The six-mile trip to my airport hotel that had taken 20 minutes earlier in the day took more than three hours. 

At my hotel, the Westin, power was out, some interior plaster had broken loose and there had been water damage, but little else.
With Garpian randomness, a hotel across the street, the Amfac, had been hit harder: A large sheet of its concrete facade and several window balconies were torn away. 

The Westin staff had, kindly, set out lighted candles in the ballroom, prepared a cold-cuts buffet and passed around pillows and blankets.
I fell asleep on the lobby floor, next to a man wearing a Chicago Cubs jacket.
I expected him to say, "I told you so," but he already was snoring. 

The journalistic consensus was that the earthquake made the World Series seem unimportant.
My response was that sports rarely are important, only diverting, and the quake merely highlighted that fact. 

Should the rest of the Series be played at all?
Sure.
The quake and baseball weren't related, unlike the massacre of athletes that attended the 1972 Olympics.
That heavily politicized event learned nothing from the horrifying experience, and seems doomed to repeat it. 

Two ironies intrude.
This has been widely dubbed the BART Series, after the local subway line, and the Bay Bridge Series.
Flags fly at half-staff for the death of Bart Giamatti, the late baseball commissioner, and now the Bay Bridge lies in ruins.
A Series that was shaping up as the dullest since the one-sided Detroit-over-San Diego go of 1984 has become memorable in the least fortunate way.
Still, its edge is lost.
It now will be played mostly for the record, and should be wrapped up as quickly as possible, without "off" days. 

And I will never again complain about a rainout. 

