.START 

Tuesday's rout of a GOP congressional hopeful in a Mississippi district that hasn't backed a Democratic presidential candidate since Adlai Stevenson is another reminder that, at least at the federal level, political "ticket splitting" has been on the rise over the past half century.
In only one presidential election year prior to 1948 did more than 20% of the nation's congressional districts choose a different party's candidate for the White House than for the House of Representatives.
Now that percentage routinely equals a third and twice has been above 40%. 

As we know, voters tend to favor Republicans more in races for president than in those for Congress.
In every presidential election over the past half century, except for the Goldwater presidential candidacy, the GOP has captured a greater percentage of the major-party popular vote for president than it has of congressional seats or the popular vote for Congress.
Prior to 1932, the pattern was nearly the opposite. 

What accounts for the results of recent decades?
A simple economic theory may provide at least a partial explanation for the split personality displayed by Americans in the voting booth.
The theory relies on three assumptions: 

1) Voters can "buy" one of two brands when they select their political agents -- a Republican brand that believes in the minimalist state and in the virtues of private markets over the vices of public action, and a Democratic brand that believes in big government and in public intervention to remedy the excesses attendant to the pursuit of private interest. 

2) Congressional representatives have two basic responsibilities while voting in office -- dealing with national issues (programmatic actions such as casting roll call votes on legislation that imposes costs and/or confers benefits on the population at large) and attending to local issues (constituency service and pork barrel). 

3) Republican congressional representatives, because of their belief in a minimalist state, are less willing to engage in local benefit-seeking than are Democratic members of Congress. 

If these assumptions hold, voters in races for Congress face what in economic theory is called a prisoner's dilemma and have an incentive, at the margin, to lean Democratic.
If they put a Republican into office, not only will they acquire less in terms of local benefits but their selected legislator will be relatively powerless to prevent other legislators from "bringing home the bacon" to their respective constituencies.
Each legislator, after all, is only one out of 535 when it comes to national policy making. 

In races for the White House, a voter's incentive, at the margin, is to lean Republican.
Although a GOP president may limit local benefits to the voter's particular district/state, such a president is also likely to be more effective at preventing other districts/states and their legislators from bringing home the local benefits.
The individual voter's standing consequently will be enhanced through lower taxes. 

While this theory is exceedingly simple, it appears to explain several things.
First, why ticket splitting has increased and taken the peculiar pattern that it has over the past half century: Prior to the election of Franklin Roosevelt as president and the advent of the New Deal, government occupied a much smaller role in society and the prisoner's dilemma problem confronting voters in races for Congress was considerably less severe. 

Second, it explains why voters hold Congress in disdain but generally love their own congressional representatives: Any individual legislator's constituents appreciate the specific benefits that the legislator wins for them but not the overall cost associated with every other legislator doing likewise for his own constituency. 

Third, the theory suggests why legislators who pay too much attention to national policy making relative to local benefit-seeking have lower security in office.
For example, first-term members of the House, once the most vulnerable of incumbents, have become virtually immune to defeat.
The one exception to this recent trend was the defeat of 13 of the 52 freshman Republicans brought into office in 1980 by the Reagan revolution and running for re-election in 1982.
Because these freshmen placed far more emphasis on their partisan role -- spreading the Reagan revolution -- in national policy making, they were more vulnerable to defeat. 

Fourth, the theory indicates why the Republican Party may have a difficult time attracting viable candidates for congressional office.
Potential candidates may be discouraged from running less by the congressional salary than by the prospect of defeat at the hands of a Democratic opponent.
To the extent that potential Republican candidates and their financial backers realize that the congressional prisoner's dilemma game works to their disadvantage, the Republican Party will be hindered in its attempts to field a competitive slate of congressional candidates. 

Fifth, the theory may provide at least a partial reason for why ticket splitting has been particularly pronounced in the South.
To the extent that Democratic legislators from the South have held a disproportionate share of power in Congress since 1932 and have been able to translate such clout into relatively more local benefits for their respective constituencies, voters in the South have had an especially strong incentive to keep such Democrats in office. 

Finally, the theory suggests why Republicans generally have fared better in Senate races than in campaigns for the House.
Since local benefit-seeking matters more and national policy making matters less in the lower chamber of Congress, this is precisely the pattern one would expect if Republicans are less willing to engage in local benefit-seeking than their Democratic counterparts. 

Is there any empirical support for this theory?
Three pieces of evidence corroborate the key assumption that Democratic legislators are more willing to engage in local benefit-seeking than their Republican colleagues.
First, economists James Bennett and Thomas DiLorenzo find that GOP senators turn back roughly 10% more of their allocated personal staff budgets than Democrats do.
To the extent that the primary duty of personal staff involves local benefit-seeking, this indicates that political philosophy leads congressional Republicans to pay less attention to narrow constituent concerns. 

Second, if the key assumption is valid, Democrats should have lower attendance rates on roll-call votes than Republicans do to the extent that such votes reflect national policy making and that participating in such votes takes away from the time a legislator could otherwise devote to local benefit-seeking.
This is indeed what the data indicate, particularly in the case of the House.
The Democratic House attendance rate has not exceeded the Republican House attendance rate since 1959. 

Finally, as shown in the table, Democrats allocate a higher proportion of their personal staffs to district offices -- where local benefit-seeking duties matter more and national policy making activities matter less relative to Washington offices.
An examination of changes in personal staffing decisions in the Senate between 1986 and 1987 (when control of that body changed party hands), moreover, reveals that the personal staffing differences noted in the table cannot be attributed to the disproportionate control Democrats exercise, due to their majority-party status, over other resources such as committee staff. 

An additional piece of evidence from the Senate: Holding other factors constant, such as incumbency advantages and regional factors, the difference between popular votes for Republican presidential and senatorial candidates in states conducting a Senate election turns out to be a positive function of how onerous the federal government's tax burden is per state (a progressive tax rate hits higher-income states harder).
Put more simply, GOP candidates for president are looked on more kindly by voters than Republican candidates for the Senate when the prisoner's dilemma is more severe. 

Moreover, ticket splitting appears to take the same peculiar pattern at the state government level as it does at the federal level.
State government is more typically split along Republican-governor/Democratic-legislature lines than the reverse.
A cross-state econometric investigation, furthermore, reveals that, holding other factors constant, the difference between a state's major-party vote going to the Republican gubernatorial candidate and the Republican share of the lower state house is a positive function of the state tax rate. 

In sum, at both the federal and state government levels at least part of the seemingly irrational behavior voters display in the voting booth may have an exceedingly rational explanation. 

Mr. Zupan teaches at the University of Southern California's business school. 

