.START 

Western Digital Corp. reported a net loss of $2.7 million, or nine cents a share, for its first quarter ended Sept. 30, citing factors as varied as hurricane damage, an advance in graphics technology and the strengthening dollar. 

In the year-ago period, the company earned $12.9 million, or 45 cents a share, on sales of $247 million.
Sales for the just-ended period fell to about $225 million, the maker of computer parts said. 

Nonetheless, Chairman Roger W. Johnson said he expects the company to be profitable in the current quarter. "We are positioned to come through," he said, noting that the company's backlog was up from the previous quarter.
In its second quarter last year, Western Digital earned $12.7 million, or 44 cents a share, on sales of $258.4 million. 

Mr. Johnson said Western Digital's plant in Puerto Rico was affected by Hurricane Hugo, losing three days' production because of the storm, which wrecked much of the Caribbean island's infrastructure.
Although the plant itself wasn't damaged, Mr. Johnson said millions of dollars in first-quarter revenue were lost.
The revenue will be regained in the current period, he added. 

There are no plans to initiate a common stock dividend, Mr. Johnson said, explaining that the board continues to believe shareholders are best served by reinvesting excess cash. 

Mr. Johnson said the first-quarter loss also heavily reflected a rapid change in graphics technology that left reseller channels with too many of the old computer graphics boards and too few new monitors compatible with the new graphics boards.
Western Digital doesn't make the monitors. 

An accelerating move by personal computer manufacturers' to include advanced graphics capabilities as standard equipment further dampened reseller purchases of Western Digital's equipment. 

"The other areas of the business -- storage and microcomputers -- were very good," Mr. Johnson said.
He said Western Digital has reacted swiftly to the movement to video graphics array, VGA, graphics technology from the old enhanced graphics adapter, EGA, which has a lower resolution standard, technology and now is one of the leading producers of these newer units.
Other makers of video controller equipment also were caught in the EGA-VGA shift, he said, "but we were able to respond much more quickly." 

Still, Mr. Johnson said, "our stock is grossly undervalued." He said the company has cut operating expenses by about 10% over the last few quarters, while maintaining research and development at about 8% to 9% of sales. 

As part of its reorganization this week, Western Digital has divided its business into two segments -- storage products, including controllers and disk drives; and microcomputer products, which include graphics, communications and peripheral control chips. 

Graphics, communications and peripheral control chips were combined because, increasingly, multiple functions are being governed by a single chip. 

Storage, which includes computer controllers and 3.5-inch disk drives, represents nearly two-thirds of the company's business.
Disk drives, which allow a computer to access its memory, generated 38% more revenue in the most recent period compared with the fiscal first quarter a year earlier. 

Computer parts are getting ever smaller, Mr. Johnson said, a shrinking that has propelled laptops into position as the fastest-growing segment of the computer business.
As smaller and more powerful computers continue to be the focus of the industry, he said, Western Digital is strengthening development of laptop parts. 

Next year Western Digital plans to consolidate its operations from 11 buildings in Irvine into two buildings in the same citya new headquarters and, a block away, a modern $100 million silicon wafer fabrication plant.
The plan will help the company in its existing joint manufacturing agreement with AT&T. 

About half of Western Digital's business is overseas, and Mr. Johnson expects that proportion to continue.
Plans to dissolve many of the trade barriers within Europe in 1992 creates significant opportunities for the company, he said, particularly since Western Digital already manufactures there.
Capitalizing on that presence, Western Digital is launching a major effort to develop the embryonic reseller market in Europe. 

