.START 

Chase Manhattan Corp., after trying unsuccessfully to sell its interest in its lower Manhattan operations building, has exercised its option to purchase the 50-story office tower. 

Chase had purchased an option to buy the building at One New York Plaza for an undisclosed sum from the late Sol Atlas as part of its original lease in 1970. 

The current transaction cost the bank approximately $140 million.
Of that amount, $20 million was payment for the land underneath the building and the rest was for the building itself. 

The building houses about 4,500 Chase workers, most of whom will be moved to downtown Brooklyn after the bank's new back office center is completed in 1993.
The move is part of Chase's strategy to consolidate its back offices under one roof.
The headquarters is located a few blocks away at 1 Chase Manhattan Plaza. 

As part of its decision to leave the building, Chase tried to sell its interest, along with the Atlas estate's interest, shortly after the October 1987 stock market crash.
Chase Senior Vice President George Scandalios said the bank decided to exercise its option after bids fell short of expectations.
He said Chase and the Atlas estate were looking to sell the entire building for $400 million to $475 million, but didn't get an offer for more than $375 million. 

As the building's new owner, Chase will have its work cut out for it.
Chase is vacating 1.1 million square feet of space, and Salomon Brothers Inc., whose headquarters is in the building, also plans to move shortly.
In addition, another major building tenant, Thomson McKinnon Inc. 's Thomson McKinnon Securities, likely will vacate the premises as part of its liquidation. 

New York real estate brokerage Edward S. Gordon Co. will have the difficult task of finding new tenants.
Even with its striking views of the New York harbor, the building is considered antiquated by modern office standards.
And Chase will have to spend approximately $50 million to remove asbestos from the premises. 

