.START 

Heidi Ehman might have stepped from a recruiting poster for young Republicans.
White, 24 years old, a singer in her church choir, she symbolizes a generation that gave its heart and its vote to Ronald Reagan. "I felt kind of safe," she says. 

No longer.
When the Supreme Court opened the door this year to new restrictions on abortion, Ms. Ehman opened her mind to Democratic politics.
Then a political novice, she stepped into a whirl of "pro-choice" marches, house parties and fund-raisers.
Now she leads a grassroots abortion-rights campaign in Passaic County for pro-choice Democratic gubernatorial candidate James Florio. 

"This is one where I cross party lines," she says, rejecting the anti-abortion stance of Rep. Florio's opponent, Reagan-Republican Rep. James Courter. "People my age thought it wasn't going to be an issue.
Now it has -- especially for people my age." 

Polls bear out this warning, but after a decade of increased Republican influence here, the new politics of abortion have contributed to a world turned upside down for Mr. Courter.
Unless he closes the gap, Republicans risk losing not only the governorship but also the assembly next month.
Going into the 1990s, the GOP is paying a price for the same conservative social agenda that it used to torment Democrats in the past. 

This change comes less from a shift in public opinion, which hasn't changed much on abortion over the past decade, than in the boundaries of the debate.
New Jersey's own highest court remains a liberal bulwark against major restrictions on abortion, but the U.S. Supreme Court ruling, Webster vs. Missouri, has engaged voters across the nation who had been insulated from the issue. 

Before July, pro-choice voters could safely make political decisions without focusing narrowly on abortion.
Now, the threat of further restrictions adds a new dimension, bringing an upsurge in political activity by abortion-rights forces.
A recent pro-choice rally in Trenton drew thousands, and in a major reversal, Congress is defying a presidential veto and demanding that Medicaid abortions be permitted in cases of rape and incest. 

"If Webster hadn't happened, you wouldn't be here," Linda Bowker tells a reporter in the Trenton office of the National Organization for Women. "We could have shouted from the rooftops about Courter . . . and no one would have heard us." 

New Jersey is a proving ground for this aggressive women's-rights movement this year.
The infusion of activists can bring a clash of cultures.
In Cherry Hill, the National Abortion Rights Action League, whose goal is to sign up 50,000 pro-choice voters, targets a union breakfast to build labor support for its cause.
The league organizers seem more a fit with a convention next door of young aerobics instructors in leotards than the beefy union leaders; "I wish I could go work out," says a slim activist.
A labor chief speaks sardonically of having to "man and woman" Election Day phones. 

No age group is more sensitive than younger voters, like Ms. Ehman.
A year ago this fall, New Jersey voters under 30 favored George Bush by 56% to 39% over Michael Dukakis, according to a survey then by Rutgers University's Eagleton Institute.
A matching Eagleton-Newark Star Ledger poll last month showed a complete reversal.
Voters in the same age group backed Democrat Florio 55% to 29% over Republican Courter. 

Abortion alone can't explain this shift, but New Jersey is a model of how so personal an issue can become a baseline of sorts in judging a candidate.
By a 2-to-1 ratio, voters appear more at ease with Mr. Florio's stance on abortion, and polls indicate his lead widens when the candidates are specifically linked to the issue. 

"The times are my times," says Mr. Florio.
The Camden County congressman still carries himself with a trademark "I'm-coming-down-your-throat" intensity, but at a pause in Newark's Columbus Day parade recently, he was dancing with his wife in the middle of the avenue in the city's old Italian-American ward.
After losing by fewer than 1,800 votes in the 1981 governor's race, he has prepared himself methodically for this moment, including deciding in recent years he could no longer support curbs on federal funding for Medicaid abortions. 

"If you're going to be consistent and say it is a constitutionally protected right," he asks, "how are you going to say an upscale woman who can drive to the hospital or clinic in a nice car has a constitutional right and someone who is not in great shape financially does not?" 

Mr. Courter, by comparison, seems a shadow of the confident hawk who defended Oliver North before national cameras at Iran-Contra hearings two years ago.
Looking back, he says he erred by stating his "personal" opposition to abortion instead of assuring voters that he wouldn't impose his views on "policy" as governor.
It is a distinction that satisfies neither side in the debate. 

"He doesn't know himself," Kathy Stanwick of the Abortion Rights League says of Mr. Courter's position.
Even abortion opponents, however angry with Mr. Florio, can't hide their frustration with the Republican's ambivalence. "He doesn't want to lead the people," says Richard Traynor, president of New Jersey Right to Life. 

Moreover, by stepping outside the state's pro-choice tradition, Mr. Courter aggravates fears that he is too conservative as well on more pressing concerns such as auto insurance rates and the environment.
He hurt himself further this summer by bringing homosexual issues into the debate; and by wavering on this issue and abortion, he has weakened his credibility in what is already a mean-spirited campaign on both sides. 

Elected to Congress in 1978, the 48-year-old Mr. Courter is part of a generation of young conservatives who were once very much in the lead of the rightward shift under Mr. Reagan.
Like many of his colleagues, he didn't serve in Vietnam in the 1960s yet embraced a hawkish defense and foreign policy -- even voting against a 1984 resolution critical of the U.S. mining of Nicaraguan harbors. 

Jack Kemp and the writers Irving Kristol and George Gilder were influences, and Mr. Courter's own conservative credentials proved useful to the current New Jersey GOP governor, Thomas Kean, in the 1981 Republican primary here. 

The same partnership is now crucial to Mr. Courter's fortunes, but the abortion issue is only a reminder of the gap between his record and that of the more moderate, pro-choice Gov. Kean.
While the Warren County congressman pursued an anti-government, anti-tax agenda in Washington, Gov. Kean was approving increased income and sales taxes at home and overseeing a near doubling in the size of New Jersey's budget in his eight years in office. 

Kean forces play down any differences with Mr. Courter, but this history makes it harder for the conservative to run against government.
Mr. Courter's free-market plan to bring down auto insurance rates met criticism from Gov. Kean's own insurance commissioner.
Mr. Courter is further hobbled by a record of votes opposed to government regulation on behalf of consumers. 

Fluent in Spanish from his days in the Peace Corps, Mr. Courter actively courts minority voters but seems oddly over his head.
He is warm and polished before a Puerto Rican Congress in Asbury Park.
Yet minutes after promising to appoint Hispanics to high posts in state government, he is unable to say whether he has ever employed any in his congressional office. "I don't think we do now," he says. "I think we did." 

Asked the same question after his appearance, Democrat Florio identifies a staff member by name and explains her whereabouts today.
When he is presented with a poster celebrating the organization's 20th anniversary, he recognizes a photograph of one of the founders and recalls time spent together in Camden. 

Details and Camden are essential Florio.
Elected to Congress as a "Watergate baby" in 1974, he ran for governor three years later.
In the opinion of many, he hasn't stopped running since, even though he declined a rematch with Gov. Kean in 1985.
His base in South Jersey and on the House Energy and Commerce Committee helped him sustain a network of political-action committees to preserve his edge.
With limited budgets for television in a high-priced market, Mr. Florio's higher recognition than his rival is a major advantage. 

More than ever, his pro-consumer and pro-environment record is in sync with the state.
Auto insurance rates are soaring.
A toxic-waste-dump fire destroyed part of an interstate highway this summer.
In Monmouth, an important swing area, Republican freeholders now run on a slogan promising to keep the county "clean and green." 

Mr. Florio savors this vindication, but at age 52, the congressman is also a product of his times and losses.
He speaks for the death penalty as if reading from Exodus 21; to increase state revenue he focuses not on "taxes" but on "audits" to cut waste.
Hard-hitting consultants match ads with Mr. Courter's team, and Mr. Florio retools himself as the lean, mean Democratic fighting machine of the 1990s.
Appealing to a young audience, he scraps an old reference to Ozzie and Harriet and instead quotes the Grateful Dead.
The lyric chosen -- "long strange night" -- may be an apt footnote to television spots by both candidates intended to portray each other as a liar. 

The Democratic lawmaker fits a pattern of younger reformers arising out of old machines, but his ties to Camden remain a sore point because of the county's past corruption.
His campaign hierarchy is chosen from elsewhere in the state, and faced with criticism of a sweetheart bank investment, he has so far blunted the issue by donating the bulk of his profits to his alma mater, Trenton State College. 

Mr. Florio's forcefulness on the abortion issue after the Webster ruling divides some of his old constituency.
Pasquale Pignatelli, an unlikely but enthusiastic pipe major in an Essex County Irish bagpipe band, speaks sadly of Mr. Florio. "I am a devout Catholic," says Mr. Pignatelli, a 40-year-old health officer. "I can't support him because of abortion." 

Bill Wames Sr., 72, is Catholic too, but unfazed by Mr. Florio's stand on abortion.
A security guard at a cargo terminal, he wears a Sons of Italy jacket and cap celebrating "The US 1 Band." "I still think the woman has the right to do with her body as she pleases," he says. "If you want more opinions ask my wife.
She has lots of opinions." 

