.START 

British Airways PLC, a crucial participant in the proposed buy-out of UAL Corp., washed its hands of the current efforts to revive a bid for the parent of United Airlines. 

Specifically, the British carrier said it currently has no plans to participate in any new offer for UAL.
In addition, British Air officially withdrew its support for the previous $300-a-share bid in a terse statement that said "the original deal is closed." 

Company officials said later that British Airways believes its involvement in the UAL buy-out ended last Friday when the buy-out group, which also includes UAL's management and pilot union, failed to obtain financing for the $6.79 billion transaction. 

The carrier stopped short of saying it wouldn't at some point reconsider participating in any new bid for UAL. However, company officials said they plan to take "no initiatives" to resurrect the transaction, and "aren't aware" of any restructured bid in the making. 

Collectively, the statements raised questions about whether a new bid for UAL will ever get off the ground.
The transaction has had a series of setbacks since the financing problems became known last Friday, with no signs or statements from the buy-out group to indicate that any progress has taken place. 

However, in response to the British Air decision, United's pilot union vowed to continue efforts to revive the buy-out.
Pilot union Chairman Frederick C. Dubinsky said advisers to UAL management and the union will begin meeting in New York today and will work through the weekend to devise a new proposal to present to UAL's board "at the earliest time possible." Pilot union advisers appeared confident that a new bid could go forward even without British Air's participation. 

UAL declined to comment on British Air's statement.
UAL Chairman Stephen M. Wolf, who is leading the management end of the buy-out, hasn't provided investors with any assurances about the prospect of a new deal. 

In another setback yesterday, United's machinist union asked the Treasury Department to investigate whether certain aspects of the original buy-out proposal violated tax laws.
In an effort to derail the buy-out, the union has already called for investigations by the Securities and Exchange Commission, Transportation Department and Labor Department. 

But there was one bright spot yesterday.
The United flight-attendants union agreed to negotiations that could lead to the flight attendants contributing concessions to a revived bid in exchange for an ownership stake.
The pilot union, the only one to support the buy-out thus far, said the flight attendants' decision "enforces our belief that an all-employee owned airline is practical and achievable." 

Still, without the assurance of British Airways' financial backing, it will be tougher for the buy-out group to convince already-reluctant banks to make loan commitments for a revised bid, especially since British Air's original investment represented 78% of the cash equity contribution for the bid. 

Under the previous plan, British Air would have received a 15% stake in UAL in exchange for a $750 million equity investment, with a 75% stake going to UAL employees and 10% to UAL management. 

British Air officials said the airline's chairman, Lord King, was concerned about news reports indicating that British Air might be willing to participate in a bid that included a lower purchase price and better investment terms for the British carrier. 

The previous reports were based on remarks by British Air's chief financial officer, Derek Stevens, who said any revised bid would have to include a lower purchase price to reflect the sharp drop in UAL's stock in the past week. 

UAL stock dropped $1.625 yesterday to $190.125 on volume of 923,500 shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

UAL declined to comment on British Air's statement. 

In an interview Wednesday with Dow Jones Professional Investor Report, Mr. Stevens said, "We're in no way committed to a deal going through at all.
We're not rushing into anything.
We don't want to be party to a second rejection." 

Indeed, British Air seemed to be distancing itself from the troubled transaction early in an effort to avoid any further embarrassment.
The original transaction fell through on the same day British Air shareholders approved the plan at a special meeting after the British succeeded in arranging the financing for its equity contribution. 

The carrier also seemed eager to place blame on its American counterparts. "The {buy-out} consortium ceased to exist because our American partners were not capable of organizing the financing," a British Air spokesman said. 

British Airways may have begun to have second thoughts about the transaction after the Transportation Department forced Northwest's Airlines' new owners to restructure the equity contribution of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines in that carrier.
Most of the department's statements since the Northwest transaction indicated it planned to curtail foreign ownership stakes in U.S. carriers. 

Even before British Air's announcement, pilot union leaders had been meeting in Chicago yesterday to consider their options.
The leaders expressed support for trying to revive the bid following a briefing Wednesday by the union's advisers, Lazard Freres & Co. and Paul, Weiss, Rifkind Wharton & Garrison.
They also unanimously re-elected Mr. Dubinsky, the union chairman who has led the pilots' 2 1/2-year fight to take control of the airline. 

UAL's advisers have indicated previously that it may take a while to come forward with a revised plan since they want to have firm bank commitments before launching a new bid.
They have maintained that banks remain interested in financing the transaction.
The buy-out fell through after Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp., the lead banks in the transaction, failed to obtain $7.2 billion in financing needed for the plan. 

