.START 

For retailers, Christmas, not Halloween, promises to be this year's spookiest season. 

Many retailers fear a price war will erupt if cash-strapped companies such as Campeau Corp. slash tags to spur sales.
Concerns about the stock market, doubts about the economy in general and rising competition from catalog companies also haunt store operators. 

"Profits at Christmas could be under attack for every retailer," asserts Norman Abramson, president and chief operating officer of Clothestime Inc., an off-price chain. 

Even if there isn't any widespread discounting, the outlook for industry profits isn't good.
Management Horizons forecasts a 1.4% profit decline for non-auto retailers this year, after annual drops that averaged 4.5% in 1988 and 1987. "For the last two and a half years, retailing has been in a mild recession," says Carl Steidtmann, chief economist at the Columbus, Ohio, consulting firm. 

This year, many stores are entering the Christmas season in turmoil: Bonwit Teller and B. Altman parent L.J. Hooker Corp. is operating under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code; B.A.T Industries PLC's healthy Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field's chains are on the auction block; Campeau's Bloomingdale's is also on the block. 

Industry observers expect a wide divergence in performance.
Stores in a state of confusion are likely to fare poorly, and to lose customers to stable chains such as Limited Inc., May Department Stores Co. and Dillard Department Stores Inc., which should do well. 

"There are going to be very clear winners and very clear losers," says Cynthia Turk, a Touche Ross & Co. retail consultant. 

Says Mr. Steidtmann: "I'm looking for a bi-polar Christmas." 

Economists expect general merchandise sales in the fourth quarter to rise 4.5% to 6% from year-ago figures.
But Mr. Steidtmann predicts that healthy stores hawking mostly apparel could ring up gains of as much as 25% to 30%.
Troubled chains could see their sales drop as much as 8%, he believes, as managers distracted by fears about the future allow their stores to get sloppy.
Thin merchandise selections at the most troubled chains are also expected to hurt sales. 

Catalog companies are likely to pose a bigger threat to all stores this year, particularly in December.
More than 200 catalog outfits are promoting a low-cost Federal Express service that guarantees pre-Christmas delivery of orders made by a certain date. 

"Traditionally, consumers were concerned about ordering after the first of December because they didn't believe they would get it by Christmas," says Adam Strum, chairman of the Wine Enthusiast Inc., which sells wine cellars and accessories through the mail.
Using Federal Express delivery last year, Mr. Strum says, "December was our biggest month." 

Even Sears, Roebuck & Co. is getting into the act, offering for the first time to have Federal Express deliver toys ordered by Dec. 20 from its Wish Book catalog. 

K mart Corp. Chairman Joseph E. Antonini summed up his outlook for the Christmas season as "not troublesome." He's not predicting a blockbuster, but he is "more optimistic than three months ago" because employment remains strong and inflation low. 

Other retailers are also preparing for a ho-hum holiday.
Philip M. Hawley, chairman of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., expects sales at department stores open at least a year to rise a modest 3% to 5% over last year's totals, both for his company and the industry in general. "I'm not looking for a runaway Christmas at all," he says. 

"It isn't a real boom holiday season in our eyes," says Woolworth Corp. Chairman Harold E. Sells, "but it isn't going to be a bust either." Mr. Sells expects fourth-quarter sales at his company -- which besides Woolworth stores includes Kinney and Foot Locker shoe stores and other specialty chains -- to rise "pretty much in line" with its year-to-date increases of between 8% and 9%.
The estimate includes the results of new stores. 

A consumer poll conducted in early September by Leo J. Shapiro & Associates, a market researcher based in Chicago, also suggests a modest holiday.
Of the 450 survey respondents, 35% said they expect to spend less buying Christmas gifts this year than last year, while 28% said they expect to spend more and 37% said their gift budget would stay the same.
The results are almost identical to Shapiro's September 1988 numbers. 

Retailers could get a boost this year from the calendar.
Christmas falls on a Monday, creating a big last-minute weekend opportunity for stores.
Most will stay open late Saturday night and open their doors again Sunday. 

But many consumers probably will use the extra time to put off some purchasing until the last minute. "What you'll hear as we get into December is that sales are sluggish," predicts Woolworth's Mr. Sells. "The week ending the 24th is going to save the entire month for everyone." 

