.START 

WASHINGTON LIES LOW after the stock market's roller-coaster ride. 

Lawmakers, haunted by charges that some of their comments contributed to the 1987 crash, generally shy away from calls for sweeping new legislation.
But a House Energy and Commerce subcommittee will quiz SEC Chairman Breeden Wednesday, and Treasury Secretary Brady will go before the Senate Banking panel Thursday. 

The market's wild week may speed along the market-reform legislation that has been pending for months in the aftermath of the 1987 crash.
It may also expedite the SEC's modest pending changes in junk-bond disclosure rules and intensify the Treasury's look at plans for giving new tax breaks on dividends and raising taxes on short-term trades by pension funds. 

Brady and Breeden work well together on the plunge, despite the fact that the Treasury secretary opposed Breeden's nomination to the SEC post. 

BAKER FALTERS in the Mideast amid Israeli paralysis and Palestinian politics. 

Despite seeing his plan for Israeli-Palestinian elections wither, the cautious secretary of state is so far unwilling to cut U.S. economic or military aid to force Israeli cooperation.
Baker nonetheless remains furious both at Shamir, for backing down on the elections, and at Shamir's rival, Peres, for political ineptitude in forcing a premature cabinet vote on Baker's plan. 

Meanwhile, some U.S. officials fear PLO chief Arafat is getting cold feet and may back off from his recent moderation and renunciation of terrorism.
He is under intense fire from other Palestinian groups; Syria is pushing Ahmad Jibril, whose terrorist band is blamed for the Pan Am 103 bombing, as an alternative to Arafat. 

DARMAN'S MANEUVERS on the budget and capital gains hurt him in Congress. 

Republicans as well as Democrats were angered by the budget director's rejection of Speaker Foley's effort to expedite a deficitcutting measure by stripping it of the capital-gains tax cut as well as pet Democratic projects.
Darman now blames the clash on miscommunication, but House GOP leader Michel, who carried the offer to him, observes, "I was speaking English at the time, and quite loud so I could be understood." 

Senate GOP leader Dole ridicules the budget chief on the Senate floor.
Democratic counterpart Mitchell, asked to interpret Darman's threat to make permanent the across-the-board Gramm-Rudman cuts that took effect this week, says, "I don't even bother to interpret them." 

But Darman suggests such tensions will dissipate quickly. "If I can show signs of maturity, almost anybody can," he jokes. 

HHS OFFICIALS expect Secretary Sullivan to continue a ban on research using fetal tissue. 

Before he was confirmed, Sullivan said he had "reservations about any blanket prohibitions on medical research." But now, an official says, he is "surrounded by right-to-lifers," who contend that any breakthroughs in fetal-tissue research could increase the demand for abortions. 

COOPERATION WANES on weapons development between the U.S. and Europe. 

Britain, France and Italy pull out of a proposal to build new NATO frigates; the U.S. and West Germany have each withdrawn from missile projects.
Defense experts say joint projects are increasingly squeezed by budget pressures and the desire to save domestic jobs; some also fear rising protectionism as European unity nears. 

BOTH SIDES NOW: Virginia GOP lieutenant governor candidate Eddy Dalton tries to have it both ways on the abortion issue.
Though she opposes abortion in almost all cases, she airs a TV commercial using pro-choice buzzwords. "A woman ought to have a choice in cases where her life or health are in danger and in cases of rape or incest," she proclaims. 

HOT TOPIC: Interest in the abortion issue is so great that the Hotline, a daily, computer-distributed political newsletter, comes up with a spinoff product called the Abortion Report dealing solely with its political implications. 

CONSERVATIVES EXPECT Bush to solidify their majority on a key court. 

Bush has three vacancies to fill on the prestigious D.C. Circuit Court, which handles many important regulatory issues and is often considered a warm-up for future Supreme Court nominees.
Conservatives now hold only a 5-4 edge.
One slot is expected to go to EEOC Chairman Clarence Thomas, a black conservative; after mulling a fight, liberals now probably won't put up a major struggle against him. 

Other conservatives thought to be on the administration's short list include Washington lawyer Michael Uhlmann, who was passed over for the No. 2 job at the Justice Department, and Marshall Breger, chairman of a U.S. agency on administration. 

The Bush administration would also like to nominate a woman; one possibility is former Justice Department official Victoria Toensing. 

MINOR MEMOS: In the wake of the failed Panama coup, a bumper sticker appears: "Ollie Would Have Got Him." . . . Rep. Garcia, on trial for bribery and extortion, puts statements in the Congressional Record attributing missed votes to "scheduling conflicts." . . . A GOP Senate fund-raising letter from Sen. Burns of Montana is made to appear personally written, and its opening line is, "Please excuse my handwriting." But Burns confesses in an interview: "That's not my handwriting." 

