.START 

The television units of Paramount Communications Inc. and MCA Inc. are exploring the possibility of offering prime-time programming to independent stations two nights a week, industry executives say. 

Although such a venture wouldn't match the "fourth network" created by News Corp. 's Fox Broadcasting Co., MCA and Paramount may have similar ambitions.
Fox, which also owns six TV stations, provides programs three nights a week to those and other affiliates. 

Paramount Domestic TV and MCA TV formed a joint venture last month, named Premier Advertiser Sales, to sell advertising in programs syndicated by both companies, such as "Star Trek: the Next Generation," "Charles in Charge" and "Friday the 13th: the Series." 

A spokeswoman for Paramount said the company doesn't comment on speculation.
Calls to Shelly Schwab, president of MCA TV, weren't returned. 

The two companies, like Fox, already have their own TV stations.
MCA owns WWOR in New York and Paramount last month agreed to purchase a 79% stake in the TVX Broadcast Group from Salomon Inc. in a deal valued at $140 million.
TVX owns five stations, including WTXF, a Fox affiliate, in Philadelphia. 

One broadcasting executive familiar with the project said the co-venture would target stations affiliated with Fox because Fox has the desirable independent stations in most of the key cities.
Currently, Fox supplies programs on Saturdays, Sundays and Mondays, although the company plans to expand to other weeknights. 

Jamie Kellner, president of Fox Broadcasting, said, "We believe the partnership of Fox, its affiliates and advertisers is succeeding and will continue to grow." 

Another Fox official, who declined to be identified, said Fox wasn't pleased by the possible Paramount-MCA venture into prime-time programming. "To make the venture work, they would need Fox affiliates," he said. "We spent a lot of time and money in building our group of stations," he said, adding that Fox doesn't "appreciate" another company attempting to usurp its station lineup. 

Fox said it plans to offer its stations movies, theatrical and made-for-TV ventures, probably on Wednesdays, sometime next year.
It is also planning another night of original series. 

Paramount and MCA, according to the broadcasting executive, plan to offer theatrical movies produced separately by Paramount and MCA for Wednesdays and perhaps a block of original shows Fridays. 

The executive said Paramount and MCA have also held discussions with Chris-Craft Industries' broadcasting unit, which owns five independent stations in cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco and Portland, Ore.
A Chris-Craft station manager said there have been no formal talks. 

"I think it's to Fox's advantage to be associated with the Paramount-MCA venture," said Michael Conway, station manager of WTXF, the TVX station that is a Fox affiliate.
Mr. Conway said the Fox shows appearing on nights when Paramount-MCA shows wouldn't be offered could be promoted on the programs produced by Paramount-MCA. 

Michael Fisher, general manager of KTXL, a Fox affiliate in Sacramento, Calif., said, "The real question is whether the Paramount-MCA offering is practical.
It isn't. . . . Why would I consider giving up Fox, a proven commodity," for an unknown venture?
Fox attracts a young audience with shows such as "Married . . . With Children," its most successful series. 

