.START 

After watching interest in the sport plummet for years, the ski industry is trying to give itself a lift. 

Across the country, resorts are using everything from fireworks to classical-music concerts to attract new customers.
Some have built health spas, business centers and shopping villages so visitors have more to do than ski.
And this week, the industry's efforts will go national for the first time when it unveils a $7 million advertising campaign. 

Such efforts -- unheard of only a few years ago -- are the latest attempts to revive the sagging $1.76 billion U.S. ski industry.
Since the start of the decade, lift-ticket sales have grown only 3% a year on average, compared with 16% annual growth rates in the '60s and '70s.
Last season, lift-ticket sales fell for the first time in seven years.
By some estimates, nearly a fourth of all U.S. ski areas have been forced to shut down since the early '80s. 

Competition and mounting insurance and equipment costs have been the undoing of many resorts.
But another big problem has been the aging of baby boomers.
Skiing, after all, has mainly been for the young and daring and many baby boomers have outgrown skiing or have too many family responsibilities to stick with the sport. 

In its new ad campaign, created by D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles Inc., Chicago, the ski industry is trying to change its image as a sport primarily for young white people.
One 60-second TV spot features a diverse group of skiers gracefully gliding down sun-drenched slopes: senior citizens, minorities, families with children -- even a blind skier. "Ski school is great," cries out a tot, bundled in a snowsuit as he plows down a bunny slope. "You'll never know 'til you try," says a black skier. 

"We used to show some hot-dog skier in his twenties or thirties going over the edge of a cliff," says Kathe Dillmann, a spokeswoman for the United Ski Industries Association, the trade group sponsoring the campaign. 

Ski promotions have traditionally avoided the touchy issue of safety.
But the new commercials deal with it indirectly by showing a woman smiling as she tries to get up from a fall. "We wanted to show it's okay if you fall," says Ms. Dillmann. "Most people think if you slip, you'll wind up in a body cast." 

The ad campaign represents an unusual spirit of cooperation among resorts and ski equipment makers; normally, they only run ads hyping their own products and facilities.
But in these crunch times for the ski industry, some resorts, such as the Angel Fire, Red River and Taos ski areas in New Mexico, have even started shuttle-busing skiers to each other's slopes and next year plan to sell tickets good for all local lifts. 

Many resorts also are focusing more on the service side of their business.
Since 40% of skiers are parents, many slopes are building nurseries, expanding ski schools and adding entertainment for kids.
Vail, Colo., now has a playland that looks like an old mining town; kids can ski through and pan for fool's gold.
For $15, they can enjoy their own nightly entertainment, with dinner, without mom and dad. 

A few years ago, parents usually had to hire a sitter or take turns skiing while one spouse stayed with the children. "Most parents who had to go through that never came back," says Michael Shannon, president of Vail Associates Inc., which owns and operates the Vail and nearby Beaver Creek resorts. 

To make skiing more convenient for time-strapped visitors, several resorts are buying or starting their own travel agencies.
In one phone call, ski buffs can make hotel and restaurant reservations, buy lift tickets, rent ski equipment and sign up for lessons.
And resorts are adding other amenities, such as pricey restaurants, health spas and vacation packages with a twist.
During Winter Carnival week, for example, visitors at Sunday River in Maine can take a hot-air balloon ride. 

"People these days want something else to do besides ski and sit in the bar," says Don Borgeson, executive director of Angel Fire, N.M.'s Chamber of Commerce. 

The ski industry hopes to increase the number of skiers by 3.5 million to about 21.7 million in the next five years with its latest ads and promotions.
But some think that's being overly optimistic. 

For one thing, it may be tough to attract people because skiing is still expensive: a lift ticket can cost up to $35 a day and equipment prices are rising.
And most vacationers still prefer a warm climate for their winter excursions.
An American Express Co. survey of its travel agents revealed that only 34% believe their clients will pick a trip this winter based on the availability of winter sports, as opposed to 69% who think that warm-weather sports will be the deciding factor. 

"Even if they could bring in that many new skiers, I don't know if {the industry} could handle that kind of an increase," says I. William Berry, editor and publisher of the Ski Industry Letter in Katonah, N.Y. "Most people will come on the weekend, the slopes will be overcrowded and then these {new skiers} won't come back." 

