.START 

Raymond Chandler, in a 1950 letter defending a weak Hemingway book, likened a champion writer to a baseball pitcher.
When the champ has lost his stuff, the great mystery novelist wrote, "when he can no longer throw the high hard one, he throws his heart instead.
He throws something.
He doesn't just walk off the mound and weep." 

Chandler might have been predicting the course of his own career.
His last published novel featuring private detective Philip Marlowe, the inferior "Playback" (1958), at times read almost like a parody of his previous work.
When he died in 1959, Chandler left behind four chapters of yet another Marlowe book, "The Poodle Springs Story," which seemed to go beyond parody into something like burlesque. "Champ" Chandler's last pitch, apparently, was a screwball. 

Now Robert Parker, author of several best sellers featuring Spenser, a contemporary private eye in the Marlowe mold, has with the blessings of the Chandler estate been hired to complete "The Poodle Springs Story." The result, "Poodle Springs" (Putnam's, 288 pages, $18.95) is an entertaining, easy to read and fairly graceful extension of the Marlowe chronicle, full of hard-boiled wisecracks and California color.
If it does not quite have Chandler's special magic -- well, at the end, neither did Chandler. 

As the book begins, a newly wed Marlowe roars into the desert resort of Poodle (a.k.a.Palm) Springs at the wheel of a Cadillac Fleetwood.
His bride is the rich and beautiful Linda Loring, a character who also appeared in Chandler's "The Long Goodbye" and "Playback." Philip and Linda move into her mansion and can't keep their hands off each other, even in front of the Hawaiian/Japanese houseman.
But the lovebirds have a conflict.
He wants to continue being a low-paid private eye, and she wants him to live off the million dollars she's settled on him. 

That's Chandler's setup.
Mr. Parker spins it into a pretty satisfying tale involving Poodle Springs high life, Hollywood low life and various folk who hang their hats in both worlds.
The supporting lineup is solid, the patter is amusing and there's even a cameo by Bernie Ohls, the "good cop" of previous Chandler books who still doesn't hesitate to have Marlowe jailed when it suits his purposes.
The style throughout bears a strong resemblance to Chandler's prose at its most pared down.
All told, Mr. Parker does a better job of making a novel out of this abandoned fragment than anyone might have had a right to expect. 

But there are grounds for complaint.
At one point, the reader is two steps ahead of Marlowe in catching on to a double identity scam -- and Marlowe is supposed to be the pro.
More bothersome, there are several apparent anachronisms.
Contact lenses, tank tops, prostitutes openly working the streets of Hollywood and the Tequila Sunrise cocktail all seem out of place in the 1950s.
A little more care in re-creating Marlowe's universe would have made the book that much more enjoyable. 

Mr. Nolan is a contributing editor at Los Angeles Magazine. 

