.START 

Ko Shioya spent eight years as the editor in chief of the Japanese edition of Reader's Digest. "Japan has been a major importer of foreign information and news," says Mr. Shioya. "But one gets fed up with importing information and news." 

Mr. Shioya has turned the tables.
Today, he is publisher of Business Tokyo magazine, the first English-language business magazine devoted to coverage of Japanese business.
After a slick redesign, the two-year-old magazine has been relaunched this month by its parent company, Keizaikai Corp., the Tokyo-based company with interests that include financial services, book publishing and a tourist agency.
Printed in the U.S. and carrying the line "The Insider's Japan," Business Tokyo's October cover story was "The World's No. 1 Customer" -- Japanese women. 

Keizaikai is one of a small but growing band of Japanese companies taking their first steps into American publishing, after making major investments in entertainment, real estate and banking companies here.
Japanese concerns have retained a number of publishing consultants and media brokers to study the U.S. market, including the New York-based investment banker Veronis, Suhler & Associates.
And they are quietly linking up with U.S. publishing trade groups. 

"Japanese publishers want to be introduced to the publishing and information industries," said John Veronis, chairman of Veronis Suhler.
While there aren't any major deals in the works currently on the scale of Sony Corp. 's recent $3.4 billion agreement to buy Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., observers don't rule out a transaction of that size. "The Japanese take the long view." said Mr. Veronis. "It may not be weeks or months, but they are also opportunistic and if they feel comfortable, they will move on a deal," he said. 

In recent months, three big Tokyo-based publishing concerns -- including Nikkei Business Publications, Nikkei Home (no relation), and Magazine House -- applied for membership in Magazine Publishers of America, which represents almost all U.S. consumer magazines. 

Japanese involvement in American publishing has been so small to date that magazines such as Business Tokyo are considered groundbreakers.
When Keizaikai launched Business Tokyo in 1987, it appealed to a more multinational audience.
The magazine was overhauled with the aid of American magazine design gurus Milton Glaser and Walter Bernard, and targets top-level U.S. executives with Japanese and American advertisers. 

American publishers appear more than ready to do some selling.
Susumu Ohara, president of Nihon Keizai Shinbun America Inc., publisher of the Japan Economic Journal, said he receives telephone calls weekly from media bankers on whether his parent company is interested in buying a U.S. consumer or business magazine. 

"The Japanese are in the early stage right now," said Thomas Kenney, a onetime media adviser for First Boston Corp. who was recently appointed president of Reader's Digest Association's new Magazine Publishing Group. "Before, they were interested in hard assets and they saw magazines as soft.
Now they realize magazines are as much a franchise as Nabisco is a franchise." 

