.START 

Banco Popular de Puerto Rico and BanPonce Corp. -- agreed to merge in a transaction valued at $324 million. 

Under the agreement, BanPonce stockholders will be able to exchange each of their shares for either shares in the new entity or cash.
In each case, the exchange is valued at $56.25 a share. 

The two companies, both based in San Juan, will form a bank holding company with assets of just over $9 billion.
The holding company will be called BanPonce Corp.
The primary subsidiary will be the combined banking operations of the two companies and will be known as Banco Popular de Puerto Rico. 

Rafael Carrion Jr., chairman of Banco Popular, will be the chairman of the holding company.
Alberto M. Paracchini, currently chairman of BanPonce, will serve as president of the bank holding company and chairman of the subsidiary. 

Banco Popular originally proposed the merger in July, in a cash and stock transaction valued at $50 a share, or about $293 million.
BanPonce reacted cooly at first, but appeared to be won over, analysts said, by Banco Popular's assurances that it wanted only a friendly transaction. 

"Banco Popular just kept waiting," said Edward Thompson, a vice president and analyst at Thomson BankWatch Inc. in New York. "They got a transaction that's good for both companies." 

The two banks appear to be a good fit.
BanPonce caters to a more affluent customer, while Banco Popular has always had a large presence among middle-income and lower-income markets.
The merger should also allow the companies to reduce costs by combining operations in many locations in Puerto Rico. "They're often right across the street from one another," Mr. Thompson said. 

Richard Carrion, who is currently president and chief executive officer of Banco Popular, said the merger will result in a "larger and stronger locally based bank." Mr. Carrion, who will now serve as president and chief executive officer of the subsidiary bank, added: "We'll be able to better compete with large foreign banks.
It makes sense from a strategic standpoint." 

The newly merged company will have 165 branches in Puerto Rico and 27 branches outside of the island.
The banks said they don't expect the merger to face any regulatory hurdles.
Mr. Carrion said the merger should be completed in six to nine months. 

