.START 

Inland Steel Industries Inc., battered by lower volume and higher costs, posted a 75% drop in third-quarter earnings. 

The nation's fourth-largest steelmaker earned $18.3 million, or 43 cents a share, compared with $61 million, or $1.70 a share, a year earlier, when the industry was enjoying peak demand and strong pricing.
Sales fell to $981.2 million from $1.02 billion. 

The earnings also mark a significant drop from the second quarter's $45.3 million or $1.25 a share.
Moreover, the earnings were well below analysts' expectations of about $1.16 a share. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Inland closed yesterday at $35.875 a share, down $1. 

The company attributed the earnings drop to lower volume related to seasonal demand and the soft consumer durable market, especially in the automotive sector.
However, the company also lost orders because of prolonged labor talks in the second quarter.
Third-quarter shipments slipped 7% from the year-ago period, and 17% from this year's second quarter. 

Profit of steel shipped for the company's steel segment slid to $26 a ton, from $66 a ton a year earlier and $57 a ton a quarter earlier. 

Analysts noted that the disappointing results don't reflect lower prices for steel products.
Charles Bradford, an analyst with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, said higher prices for galvanized and cold-rolled products offset lower prices for bar, hot-rolled and structural steel.
Structural steel, which primarily serves the construction market, was especially hurt by a 15% price drop, Mr. Bradford said. 

The company said its integrated steel sector was also hurt by higher raw material, repair and maintenance, and labor costs.
The increased labor costs became effective Aug. 1 under terms of the four-year labor agreement with the United Steelworkers union.
Meanwhile, the company's service center segment, which saw operating profit drop to $11.5 million from $30.7 million a year ago, experienced much of the same demand and cost problems, as well as start-up costs associated with a coil processing facility in Chicago and an upgraded computer information system. 

Inland Chairman Frank W. Luerssen said the company's short-term outlook is "clouded by uncertainties in the economy and financial markets." However, he noted that steel mill bookings are up from early summer levels, and that he expects the company to improve its cost performance in the fourth quarter. 

In the first nine months, profit was $113 million, or $3.04 a share, on sales of $3.19 billion, compared with $204.5 million, or $5.76 a share, on sales of $3.03 billion, a year earlier. 

