.START 

William Bennett, the White House drug-policy director, accused local officials in the Washington area of blocking construction of prison facilities to house convicted drug dealers. 

"Politics has essentially put up a roadblock" to finding sites for new federal prisons, Mr. Bennett said at a news conference called to report on his "emergency assistance program" for the capital.
Without more space to incarcerate convicted criminals, he added, "we will not win the war on drugs." 

Mr. Bennett declared in April that he would make Washington a "test case" for how the Bush administration would aid cities afflicted by heavy drug trafficking and violence.
The drug czar claimed that enforcement efforts are working here, "albeit at a slower and more halting pace than we would like." 

He acknowledged, however, that Washington's "drug-related murder rate is intolerably high.
The prisons are too crowded.
Drugs continue to be sold openly around schools, parks and housing projects." 

Mr. Bennett declined to name the area officials who he believes have impeded plans for building more federal prisons to ease Washington's problem.
But other Bush administration officials have criticized Maryland Gov. William Schaefer for blocking the use of possible sites in that state.
Administration officials also have said that Washington Mayor Marion Barry has delayed consideration of sites in the city. 

In a letter to Mr. Bennett's office, released yesterday, Washington's city administrator, Carol Thompson, complained that the drug czar had exaggerated the amount of federal drug-related assistance provided to the capital.
Referring to Mr. Bennett's claim that the federal government would provide $97 million in emergency federal support, Ms. Thompson wrote, "Our analysis was unable to even come close to documenting that figure." 

Of his successes in Washington, Mr. Bennett stressed that existing federal prisons have taken custody of 375 local inmates.
He also noted that the federal Drug Enforcement Administration has established a federal-local task force responsible since April for 106 arrests and more than $2 million in seizures of drug dealers' assets.
The Defense Department has lent the Washington U.S. attorney 10 prosecutors, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation has provided crime laboratory facilities and training, he added. 

