.START 

Democracy can be cruel to politicians: Sometimes it forces them to make choices.
Now that the Supreme Court opened the door on the subject of abortion, politicians are squinting under the glare of democratic choice.
Their discomfort is a healthy sign for the rest of us. 

Republicans are squinting most painfully, at least at first, which is only fair because they've been shielded the most.
So long as abortion was a question for litigation, not legislation, Republicans could find political security in absolutism.
They could attract one-issue voters by adopting the right-to-life movement's strongest position, even as pro-choice Republicans knew this mattered little on an issue monopolized by the court.
Now it matters. 

Much of Washington thought it detected George Bush in a characteristic waffle on abortion the past week.
Only a month ago he'd warned Congress not to pass legislation to pay for abortions in cases of rape or incest.
Last Friday, after Congress passed it anyway, he hinted he was looking for compromise.
Was the man who once was pro-choice, but later pro-life, converting again? 

In fact, Mr. Bush's dance was more wiggle than waffle.
Pro-life advocates say the White House never wavered over the veto.
Christopher Smith (R., N.J.), a pro-life leader in the House, suggested a compromise that would have adapted restrictive language from rape and incest exceptions in the states.
The White House, never eager for a fight, was happy to try, which is why George Bush said he was looking for "flexibility" last week. 

When Democrats refused to budge, pro-life Republicans met at the White House with Chief of Staff John Sununu on Monday, and Mr. Bush quickly signaled a veto.
Amid charges of "timidity" on Panama and elsewhere, the president wasn't about to offend his most energetic constituency. 

The GOP doubters were in Congress.
In last week's House vote, 41 Republicans defected.
After the vote, Connecticut Rep. Nancy Johnson rounded up nearly as many signatures on a letter to Mr. Bush urging him not to veto.
Even such a pro-life stalwart as Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) had counseled some kind of compromise.
The Senate passed the same bill yesterday, with a veto-proof majority of 67. 

The manuevering illustrates an emerging Republican donnybrook, pacified since the early 1980s.
At the 1988 GOP convention, abortion was barely discussed at all, though delegates were evenly divided on the question of an anti-abortion constitutional amendment.
Ms. Johnson made a passionate statement to the platform committee, but she was talking to herself. 

Now many Republicans are listening.
They're frightened by what they see in New Jersey, and especially Virginia, where pro-life GOP candidates for governor are being pummeled on abortion.
Eddie Mahe, a Republican consultant, says the two GOP candidates could have avoided trouble if they had framed the issue first. (In Virginia, Marshall Coleman and his running mate, Eddy Dalton, are both on the defensive for opposing abortions even in cases of rape or incest.) But Mr. Mahe adds, "The net loser in the next few years is the right-to-life side." 

Darla St. Martin, of the National Right to Life Committee, says exit polls from the 1988 election had single-issue, pro-life voters giving Mr. Bush about five more percentage points of support than pro-choice voters gave Michael Dukakis.
But the Supreme Court's opening of debate may have changed even that.
GOP pollster Neil Newhouse, of the Wirthlin Group, says polls this summer showed that the single-issue voters had about evened out.
Polls are no substitute for principle, but they'll do for some politicians. 

The Republican danger is that abortion could become for them what it's long been for Democrats, a divisive litmus test.
It's already that in the Bush administration, at least for any job in which abortion is even remotely an issue. 

Oklahoma official Robert Fulton lost a chance for a senior job in the Department of Health and Human Services after right-to-life activists opposed him.
Caldwell Butler, a conservative former congressman, was barred from a Legal Services post, after he gave wrong answers on abortion.
Even the president's doctor, Burton Lee, has said on the record that he'd love to be surgeon general but couldn't pass the pro-life test. 

In the case of HHS Secretary Louis Sullivan, the litmus test could yet damage issues important to other parts of the Republican coalition.
After Mr. Sullivan waffled on abortion last year, the White House appeased right-to-lifers by surrounding him with pro-life deputies.
Their views on health care and welfare didn't much matter, though HHS spends billions a year on both.
It makes only a handful of abortion-related decisions. 

Though Democrats can gloat at all this for now, they may want to contain their glee.
On abortion, their own day will come.
Eventually even Republicans will find a way to frame the issue in ways that expose pro-choice absolutism.
Does the candidate favor parental consent for teen-age abortions? (The pro-choice lobby doesn't.) What about banning abortions in the second and third trimesters? (The lobby says no again.) 

Democracy is forcing the abortion debate toward healthy compromise, toward the unpolarizing middle.
Roe v. Wade pre-empted political debate, so the extremes blossomed.
Now the ambivalent middle, a moral majority of sorts, is reasserting itself.
Within a few years, the outcome in most states is likely to be that abortion will be more restricted, but not completely banned.
This is where the voters are, which is where politicians usually end up. 

