.START 

NOW YOU SEE IT, now you don't. 

The recession, that is.
The economy's stutter steps leave investors wondering whether things are slowing down or speeding up.
So often are government statistics revised that they seem to resemble a spinning weather vane. 

For the past seven years, investors have had the wind at their backs, in the form of a generally growing economy.
Some may have forgotten -- and some younger ones may never have experienced -- what it's like to invest during a recession.
Different tactics are called for, as losing money becomes easier and making money becomes tougher. 

For those investors who believe -- or fear -- that 1990 will be a recession year, many economists and money managers agree on steps that can be taken to lower the risks in a portfolio. 

In a nutshell, pros advise investors who expect a slowdown to hold fewer stocks than usual and to favor shares of big companies in "defensive" industries.
A heavy dose of cash is prescribed, along with a heavier-than-usual allotment to bonds -- preferably government bonds. 

It's tempting to think these defensive steps can be delayed until a recession is clearly at hand.
But that may not be possible, because recessions often take investors by surprise. "They always seem to come a bit later than you expect.
When they do hit, they hit fast," says David A. Wyss, chief financial economist at the Data Resources division of McGraw-Hill Inc. 

Though he himself doesn't expect a recession soon, Mr. Wyss advises people who do that "the best thing to be in is long that is, 20-year to 30-year Treasury bonds." 

The reason is simple, Mr. Wyss says: "Interest rates almost always decline during recession." As surely as a seesaw tilts, falling interest rates force up the price of previously issued bonds.
They are worth more because they pay higher interest than newly issued bonds do. 

That effect holds true for both short-term and long-term bonds.
But short-term bonds can't rise too much, because everyone knows they will be redeemed at a preset price fairly soon.
Long-term bonds, with many years left before maturity, swing more widely in price. 

But not just any bonds will do.
Corporate bonds "are usually not a good bet in a recession," Mr. Wyss says.
As times get tougher, investors fret about whether companies will have enough money to pay their debts.
This hurts the price of corporate bonds.
Also, he notes, "most corporate bonds are callable." 

That means that a corporation, after a specified amount of time has passed, can buy back its bonds by paying investors the face value (plus, in some cases, a sweetener).
When interest rates have dropped, it makes sense for corporations to do just that; they then save on interest costs.
But the investors are left stranded with money to reinvest at a time when interest rates are puny. 

If corporate bonds are bad in recessions, junk bonds are likely to be the worst of all.
It's an "absolute necessity" to get out of junk bonds when a recession is in the offing, says Avner Arbel, professor of finance at Cornell University. "Such bonds are very sensitive to the downside, and this could be a disaster." 

Municipal bonds are generally a bit safer than corporate bonds in a recession, but not as safe as bonds issued by the federal government.
During an economic slump, local tax revenues often go down, raising the risks associated with at least some municipals.
And, like corporates, many municipal bonds are callable. 

But a few experts, going against the consensus, don't think bonds would help investors even if a recession is in the offing.
One of these is Jeffrey L. Beach, director of research for Underwood Neuhaus & Co., a brokerage house in Houston, who thinks that "we're either in a recession or about to go into one." What's more, he thinks this could be a nastier recession than usual: "Once the downturn comes, it's going to be very hard to reverse." 

Investors, he advises, "should be cautious," holding fewer stocks than usual and also shunning bonds.
Because he sees a "5% to 6% base rate of inflation in the economy," he doubts that interest rates will fall much any time soon. 

Instead, Mr. Beach says, investors "probably should be carrying a very high level of cash," by which he means such so-called cash equivalents as money-market funds and Treasury bills.
Greg Confair, president of Sigma Financial Inc. in Allentown, Pa., also recommends that investors go heavily for cash.
He isn't sure a recession is coming, but says the other likely alternative -- reignited inflation -- is just as bad. 

"This late in an expansion," the economy tends to veer off either into damaging inflation or into a recession, Mr. Confair says.
The Federal Reserve Board's plan for a "soft landing," he says, requires the Fed to navigate "an ever-narrowing corridor." 

A soft landing isn't something that can be achieved once and for all, Mr. Confair adds.
It has to be engineered over and over again, month after month.
He believes that the task facing Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is so difficult that it resembles "juggling a double-bladed ax and a buzz saw." 

And, in a sense, that's the kind of task individuals face in deciding what to do about stocks -- the mainstay of most serious investors' portfolios.
It comes down to a question of whether to try to "time" the market. 

For people who can ride out market waves through good times and bad, stocks have been rewarding long-term investments.
Most studies show that buy-and-hold investors historically have earned an annual return from stocks of 9% to 10%, including both dividends and price appreciation.
That's well above what bonds or bank certificates have paid. 

Moreover, because no one knows for sure just when a recession is coming, some analysts think investors shouldn't even worry too much about timing. "Trying to time the economy is a mistake," says David Katz, chief investment officer of Value Matrix Management Inc. in New York.
Mr. Katz notes that some economists have been predicting a recession for at least two years.
Investors who listened, and lightened up on stocks, "have just hurt themselves," he says. 

Mr. Katz adds that people who jump in and out of the stock market need to be right about 70% of the time to beat a buy-and-hold strategy.
Frequent trading runs up high commission costs.
And the in-and-outer might miss the sudden spurts that account for much of the stock market's gains over time. 

Still, few investors are able to sit tight when they are convinced a recession is coming.
After all, in all five recessions since 1960, stocks declined.
According to Ned Davis, president of Ned Davis Research Inc. in Nokomis, Fla., the average drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average was about 21%, and the decrease began an average of six months before a recession officially started. 

By the time a recession is "official" (two consecutive quarters of declining gross national product), much of the damage to stocks has already been done -and, in the typical case, the recession is already half over.
About six months before a recession ends, stocks typically begin to rise again, as investors anticipate a recovery. 

The average recession lasts about a year.
Unfortunately, though, recessions vary enough in length so that the average can't reliably be used to guide investors in timing stock sales or purchases. 

But whatever their advice about timing, none of these experts recommend jettisoning stocks entirely during a recession.
For the portion of an investor's portfolio that stays in stocks, professionals have a number of suggestions.
Mr. Katz advocates issues with low price-earnings ratios -- that is, low prices in relation to the company's earnings per share. "Low P-E" stocks, he says, vastly outperform others "during a recession or bear market." In good times, he says, they lag a bit, but overall they provide superior performance. 

Prof Arbel urges investors to discard stocks in small companies.
Small-company shares typically fall more than big-company stocks in a recession, he says.
And in any case, he argues, stocks of small companies are "almost as overpriced as they were Sept. 30, 1987, just before the crash." 

For example, Mr. Arbel says, stocks of small companies are selling for about 19 times cash flow. (Cash flow, basically earnings plus depreciation, is one common gauge of a company's financial health.) That ratio is dangerously close to the ratio of 19.7 that prevailed before the 1987 stock-market crash, Mr. Arbel says.
And it's way above the ratio (7.5 times cash flow) that bigger companies are selling for. 

Another major trick in making a portfolio recession-resistant is choosing stocks in "defensive" industries.
Food, tobacco, drugs and utilities are the classic examples.
Recession or not, people still eat, smoke, and take medicine when they're sick. 

George Putnam III, editor of Turnaround Letter in Boston, offers one final tip for recession-wary investors. "Keep some money available for opportunities," he says. "If the recession does hit, there will be some great investment opportunities just when things seem the blackest." 

Mr. Dorfman covers investing issues from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. 

Some industry groups consistently weather the storm better than others.
The following shows the number of times these industries outperformed the Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index during the first six months of the past seven recessions. 

Source: Merrill Lynch 

