.START 

What if it happened to us? 

In the wake of the earthquake in California and the devastation of Hurricane Hugo, many companies in disaster-prone areas are pondering the question of preparedness.
Some, particularly in West Coast earthquake zones, are dusting off their evacuation plans, checking food stocks and reminding employees of what to do if emergency strikes.
Others say they feel confident that steps they've already taken would see them through a disaster. 

Preparedness involves more than flashlights and fire alarms these days.
Some big companies have teams of in-house experts focusing on safety and business resumption.
Many companies in the path of potential disaster have set up contingency offices in safe regions, hoping they can transport employees there and resume operations quickly.
That means making sure that copies of vital computer software and company records are out of harm's way. 

Some businesses -- like Disneyland -- claim that even if they became isolated in a crisis, they would be able to feed and care for their people for as long as five days. 

"Self-sufficiency has to be the cornerstone of your plan," says Stephanie Masaki-Schatz, manager of corporate emergency planning at Atlantic Richfield Co. in Los Angeles. "If you don't save your critical people, you won't be able to bring up your vital business functions." 

Although ARCO's head office, more than 300 miles from the epicenter, wasn't affected by this week's tremors, Ms. Masaki-Schatz used the occasion to distribute a three-page memo of "Earthquake Tips" to 1,200 ARCO employees. 

"You need to capitalize on these moments when you have everyone's attention," she says. "It was a good reminder that we all need to prepare prior to an event." 

The ARCO memo urges employees to keep certain supplies at work, such as solid shoes and "heavy gloves to clear debris." It also recommends that employees be aware of everyday office items that could be used for emergency care or shelter.
Among the suggestions: Pantyhose and men's ties could be used for slings, while removable wooden shelves might aid in "breaking through office walls." 

ARCO maintains an office in Dallas that would take over if payroll operations in Pasadena were disrupted.
Two months ago the company set up a toll-free number, based outside California, to handle queries from employees about when they should report back to work after an earthquake or other disaster. 

The ARCO plan takes into account such details as which aspects of business are busier at certain times of the year.
This way, depending on when a quake might strike, priorities can be assigned to departments that should be brought back on line first. 

At Hewlett-Packard Co., the earthquake came just as the company was reviewing its own emergency procedures. "We were talking about scheduling a practice drill for November," says Joan Tharp, a spokeswoman. "Then we had a real one in the afternoon." 

The Palo Alto, Calif., computer maker scrambled to set up a special phone line to tell manufacturing and support staff to stay home Wednesday.
Sales and service employees were asked to report to work to help Bay area clients who called with computer problems.
Hewlett-Packard also called in its systems experts to restore its own computer operations. "That means we can accept orders" and begin getting back to normal, says Ms. Tharp. 

Prompted by an earlier California earthquake, as well as a fire in a Los Angeles office tower, Great Western Bank in the past year hired three emergency planners and spent $75,000 equipping a trailer with communications gear to serve as an emergency headquarters. 

Although officials of the savings and loan, a unit of Great Western Financial Corp., used some of their new plans and equipment during this week's quake, they still lost touch for more than 24 hours with 15 branches in the affected areas, not knowing if employees were injured or vaults were broken open. 

"Some people flat out didn't know what to do," says Robert G. Lee, vice president for emergency planning and corporate security at Great Western. 

As it turned out, bank employees weren't hurt and the vaults withstood the jolts.
Still, says Mr. Lee: "We need to educate people that they need to get to a phone somehow, some way, to let someone know what their status is." 

Some companies are confident that they're prepared.
Occidental Petroleum Corp. holds regular evacuation drills and stocks food, oxygen and non-prescription drugs at checkpoints in its 16-story headquarters.
The company also maintains rechargeable flashlights in offices and changes its standby supply of drinking water every three months. 

"We feel we are doing everything we can," an Occidental spokesman says. 

Walt Disney Co. 's Disneyland in Anaheim, Calif., stocks rescue equipment, medical supplies, and enough food and water to feed at least 10,000 visitors for as long as five days in the event that a calamity isolates the theme park. 

The park also has emergency centers where specially trained employees would go to coordinate evacuation and rescue plans using walkie-talkies, cellular phones, and a public-address system.
The centers are complete with maps detailing utility lines beneath rides and "safe havens" where people can be assembled away from major structures. 

Vista Chemical Co., with three chemical plants in and near Lake Charles, La., "prepares for every hurricane that enters the Gulf of Mexico," says Keith L. Fogg, a company safety director.
Hurricane Hugo, an Atlantic storm, didn't affect Vista.
But two other major storms have threatened operations so far this year, most recently Hurricane Jerry this week. 

Because hurricanes can change course rapidly, the company sends employees home and shuts down operations in stages -- the closer a storm gets, the more complete the shutdown.
The company doesn't wait until the final hours to get ready for hurricanes. "There are just tons of things that have to be considered," Mr. Fogg says. "Empty tank cars will float away on you if you get a big tidal surge." 

Still, Vista officials realize they're relatively fortunate. "With a hurricane you know it's coming.
You have time to put precautionary mechanisms in place," notes a Vista spokeswoman. "A situation like San Francisco is so frightening because there's no warning." 

