.START 

Former Democratic fund-raiser Thomas M. Gaubert, whose savings and loan was wrested from his control by federal thrift regulators, has been granted court permission to sue the regulators. 

In a ruling by the Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans, Mr. Gaubert received the go-ahead to pursue a claim against the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas for losses he suffered when the Bank Board closed the Independent American Savings Association of Irving, Texas. 

Mr. Gaubert, who was chairman and the majority stockholder of Independent American, had relinquished his control in exchange for federal regulators' agreement to drop their inquiry into his activities at another savings and loan.
As part of the agreement, Mr. Gaubert contributed real estate valued at $25 million to the assets of Independent American. 

While under the control of federal regulators, Independent American's net worth dropped from $75 million to a negative $400 million, wiping out the value of Mr. Gaubert's real estate contribution and his stock in the institution. 

Mr. Gaubert's suit to recover his damages was dismissed last year by U.S. District Judge Robert Maloney of Dallas under the Federal Tort Claims Act, which offers broad protection for actions by federal agencies and employees. 

Earlier this week, a Fifth Circuit appellate panel upheld Judge Maloney's dismissal of Mr. Gaubert's claim as a shareholder but said the judge should reconsider Mr. Gaubert's claim for the loss of his property. "It may depend on whether there was an express or implied promise . . . that the federal officials would not negligently cause the deterioration" of Independent American, the court wrote.
Mr. Gaubert's lawyer, Abbe David Lowell of Washington, D.C., says the impact of the ruling on other cases involving thrift takeovers will depend on the degree of similarity in the facts. "I don't know if this will affect one institution or a hundred," Mr. Lowell says. "It does establish a very clear precedent for suing the FHLBB where there was none before." 

MAITRE'D CLAIMS in suit that restaurant fired her because she was pregnant. 

In a suit filed in state court in Manhattan, the American Civil Liberties Union is representing the former maitre'd of the chic Odeon restaurant.
The suit, which seeks compensatory and punitive damages of $1 million, alleges that the firing of Marcia Trees Levine violated New York state's human-rights law.
Among other things, the law prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex and pregnancy. 

The suit alleges that Ms. Levine was fired after she refused to accept a lower paying, less visible job upon reaching her sixth month of pregnancy.
Ms. Levine told her employer that she was pregnant in February; a month later, the suit says, the restaurant manager told Ms. Levine that she would be demoted to his assistant because he felt customers would be uncomfortable with a pregnant maitre'd. 

Kary Moss, an attorney with the ACLU's Women's Rights Project, said, "They wanted a svelte-looking woman, and a pregnant woman is not svelte.
They told her, 'We don't hire fat people and we don't hire cripples.
And pregnant women are fat. '" Ms. Moss said Ms. Levine secretly taped many conversations with her bosses at the Odeon in which they told her she was being fired as maitre'd because she was pregnant. 

Paul H. Aloe, an attorney for Odeon owner Keith McNally, denied the allegations.
He said Ms. Levine had never been fired, although she had stopped working at the restaurant. "The Odeon made a written offer to Marcia Levine on July 10 to return to work as the maitre'd, at the same pay, same hours and with back pay accrued," he said. 

Mr. Aloe said the Odeon "has no policy against hiring pregnant people." 

LAWYERS IN Texas's biggest bank-fraud case want out in face of retrial. 

Lawyers representing five of the seven defendants in the case say their clients can no longer afford their services.
The trial of the case lasted seven months and ended in September with a hung jury. 

The defendants were indicted two years ago on charges that they conspired to defraud five thrifts of more than $130 million through a complicated scheme to inflate the price of land and condominium construction along Interstate 30, east of Dallas. 

The defense lawyers, three of whom are solo practitioners, say they can't afford to put their law practices on hold for another seven-month trial.
Some of the lawyers say they would continue to represent their clients if the government pays their tab as court-appointed lawyers. 

Assistant U.S. Attorney Terry Hart of Dallas says the government will oppose any efforts to bring in a new defense team because it would delay a retrial. 

FEDERAL JUDGE ALCEE HASTINGS of Florida, facing impeachment, received an unanticipated boost yesterday.
Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Pa.) urged acquittal of the judge in a brief circulated to his Senate colleagues during closed-door deliberations.
Among other things, the brief cited insufficient evidence.
Sen. Specter was vice chairman of the impeachment trial committee that heard evidence in the Hastings case last summer.
A former prosecutor and member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Sen. Specter is expected to exercise influence when the Senate votes on the impeachment today. 

RICHMOND RESIGNATIONS: Six partners in the Richmond, Va., firm of Browder, Russell, Morris & Butcher announced they are resigning.
Five of the partners -- James W. Morris, Philip B. Morris, Robert M. White, Ann Adams Webster and Jacqueline G. Epps -- are opening a boutique in Richmond to concentrate on corporate defense litigation, particularly in product liability cases.
The sixth partner, John H. OBrion, Jr., is joining Cowan & Owen, a smaller firm outside Richmond. 

LAW FIRM NOTES: Nixon, Hargrave, Devans & Doyle, based in Rochester, N.Y., has opened an office in Buffalo, N.Y. . . . Mayer, Brown & Platt, Chicago, added two partners to its Houston office, Eddy J. Roger Jr., and Jeff C. Dodd. . . . Copyright specialist Neil Boorstyn, who writes the monthly Copyright Law Journal newsletter, is joining McCutchen, Doyle, Brown & Enersen. 

