.START 

Westmoreland Coal Co., realizing benefits of a sustained effort to cut costs and boost productivity, reported sharply improved third-quarter results. 

The producer and marketer of low-sulfur coal said net income for the quarter was $5.9 million, or 71 cents a share, on revenue of $145.4 million.
For the year-earlier period, the company reported a loss of $520,000 or six cents a share. 

In the latest nine months, the company earned $8.5 million, or $1.03 a share.
Last year's net loss of $3,524,000 included a benefit of $1,640,000 from an accounting change.
Revenue for the nine months rose to $449 million from $441.1 million. 

In an interview, Pemberton Hutchinson, president and chief executive, cited several reasons for the improvement: higher employee productivity and "good natural conditions" in the mines, as well as lower costs for materials, administrative overhead and debt interest. 

In the latest nine months, Mr. Hutchinson said, total coal sales rose to about 14.6 million tons from about 14.3 million tons a year earlier.
In addition, long-term debt has been trimmed to about $72 million from $96 million since Jan. 1.
He predicted the debt ratio will improve further in coming quarters. 

Westmoreland's strategy is to retain and expand its core business of mining and selling low-sulphur coal in the Appalachia region.
The operating territory includes coal terminals on the Ohio River and in Newport News, Va.
Westmoreland exports about a fourth of its coal tonnage, including a significant amount of metallurgical coal produced by others that is used by steelmakers overseas. 

For the past couple of years, Westmoreland has undertaken an aggressive streamlining of all aspects of its business.
Marginal operations and assets have been sold.
The size of the company's board has been reduced to eight directors from 13.
About 140 salaried management jobs and hundreds of hourly wage positions have been eliminated.
Even perks have been reduced.
For example, the chief executive himself now pays 20% of the cost of his health benefits; the company used to pay 100%. 

"I think the ship is now righted, the bilges are pumped and we are on course," Mr. Hutchinson said of the restructuring program. "Much of what we set out to do is completed." 

But he cautioned that Westmoreland's third quarter is typically better than the fourth, so investors "shouldn't just multiply the third quarter by four" and assume the same rate of improvement can be sustained.
One difference, he said, is that the fourth quarter has significantly fewer workdays because of holidays and the hunting season. 

"I don't want to give the impression that everybody can relax now," he said. "We have to keep working at improving our core business to stay efficient.
It's a process that never really ends." 

Nevertheless, Mr. Hutchinson predicted that 1989 would be "solidly profitable" for Westmoreland and that 1990 would bring "more of the same." For all of 1988, the company reported an after-tax operating loss of $134,000 on revenue of $593.5 million.
An accounting adjustment made net income $1.5 million, or 18 cents a share. 

In a move that complements the company's basic strategy, its Westmoreland Energy Inc. unit is developing four coal-fired cogeneration plants with a partner in Virginia.
Some of the coal the plants buy will come from Westmoreland mines.
Mr. Hutchinson predicted that the unit's contribution to company results in the 1990s "will be exciting." He said Westmoreland is looking at investment stakes in other cogeneration plants east of the Mississippi River. 

Westmoreland expects energy demand to grow annually in the 2.5% range in the early 1990s. "We see coal's piece of the action growing," Mr. Hutchinson said. "Coal prices, while not skyrocketing, will grow modestly in real terms, we think." 

