.START 

Bond prices posted strong gains as investors went on a bargain hunt. 

But while the overall market improved, the new-issue junk-bond market continued to count casualties, even as junk-bond prices rose. 

Yesterday, Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. said it postponed a $220 million senior subordinated debenture offering by York International Corp. 

And Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. scrambled to restructure and improve the potential returns on a $475 million debenture offering by Chicago & North Western Acquisition Corp. that was still being negotiated late last night. 

The issue by Chicago & North Western is one of the so-called good junk-bond offerings on the new-issue calendar.
Some analysts said the restructuring of the railroad concern's issue shows how tough it is for underwriters to sell even the junk bonds of a company considered to be a relatively good credit risk. 

Since last week's junk-bond market debacle, many new issues of high-yield, high-risk corporate bonds have either been scaled back, delayed or dropped.
On Wednesday, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. had to slash the size of Continental Airlines' junk-bond offering to $71 million from $150 million.
Salomon Brothers Inc. has delayed Grand Union Co. 's $1.16 billion junk-bond offering while it restructures the transaction.
Last week, the Grand Union offering was sweetened to include warrants that allow bondholders to acquire common stock.
Prudential-Bache said the York issue was delayed because of market conditions. 

"Everything is going through firehoops right now, and {Chicago & North Western} is no exception," said Mariel Clemensen, vice president, high-yield research, at Citicorp. 

Portfolio managers say sweeteners like equity kickers and stricter protective covenants may increasingly be required to sell junk-bond deals. 

Dan Baldwin, managing director of high-yield investments at Chancellor Capital Management, said the Chicago & North Western offering was restructured in part because "several large insurance buyers right now are demanding equity as part of the package.
If you're going to take the risk in this market, you want something extra." 

Mr. Baldwin likes the offering.
But several mutual-fund managers, nervous about the deteriorating quality of their junk-bond portfolios and shy about buying new issues, said they're staying away from any junk security that isn't considered first rate for its class.
While they consider the Chicago & North Western issue to be good, they don't view it as the best. 

To lure buyers to the Chicago & North Western bonds, portfolio managers said Donaldson Lufkin sweetened the transaction by offering the bonds with a resettable interest rate and a 10% equity kicker.
The bonds are expected to have a 14 1/2% coupon rate.
The equity arrangement apparently would allow bondholders to buy a total of 10% of the stock of CNW Corp., Chicago & North Western's parent company.
Donaldson Lufkin declined to comment on the restructuring. 

According to some analysts familiar with the negotiations, the 10% of equity would come directly from Donaldson Lufkin and a fund affiliated with the investment bank Blackstone Group, which would reduce their CNW equity holdings by 5% each.
That would leave the Blackstone fund with a 60% stake and Donaldson Lufkin with 15%. 

Despite the problems with new issues, high-yield bonds showed gains in the secondary, or resell, market.
Junk bonds ended about one-half point higher with so-called high-quality issues from RJR Capital Holdings Corp. and Petrolane Gas Service Limited Partnership rising one point. 

In the Treasury market, the benchmark 30-year bond rose seven-eighths point, or $8.75 for each $1,000 face amount.
The gain reflects fresh economic evidence that inflation is moderating while the economy slows.
That raised hopes that interest rates will continue to move lower.
The Labor Department reported that consumer prices rose just 0.2% last month, slightly lower than some economists had expected. 

But there were also rumors yesterday that several Japanese institutional investors were shifting their portfolios and buying long-term bonds while selling shorter-term Treasurys. 

Short-term Treasury securities ended narrowly mixed, with two-year notes posting slight declines while three-year notes were slightly higher. 

Yesterday, the Fed executed four-day matched sales, a technical trading operation designed to drain reserves from the banking system.
The move was interpreted by some economists as a sign that the Fed doesn't want the federal funds rate to move any lower than the 8 3/4% at which it has been hovering around during the past week.
The closely watched funds rate is what banks charge each other on overnight loans.
It is considered an early signal of Fed credit policy changes. 

"The fact that they did four-day matched sales means they are not in a mood to ease aggressively.
They are telling us that {8 3/4%} is as low as they want to see the fed funds rate," said Robert Chandross at Lloyds Bank PLC. 

Treasury Securities 

The benchmark 30-year bond was quoted late at a price of 101 25/32 to yield 7.955%, compared with 100 29/32 to yield 8.032% Wednesday.
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at 100 9/32 to yield 7.937%, compared with 99 26/32 to yield 8.007%. 

Short-term rates rose yesterday.
The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills rose to 7.56% from 7.51% Wednesday, while the rate on six-month bills rose to 7.57% from 7.53%. 

Meanwhile, the Treasury sold $9.75 billion of 52-week bills yesterday.
The average yield on the bills was 7.35%, down from 7.61% at the previous 52-week bill auction Sept. 21.
Yesterday's yield was the lowest since 7.22% on July 27. 

Here are details of the auction: 

Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon-equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year. 

Corporate Issues 

Junk bond price climbed yesterday despite skittishness in the new-issue market for high-yield securities. 

Dealers said junk bond issues on average were up by 1/4 to 1/2 point with so-called quality issues from RJR Capital Holdings Corp. and Petrolane Gas Service Limited Partnership posting one-point gains. 

Petrolane Gas Service's 13 1/4% debentures traded at 102, after trading around par earlier this week, and RJR's 13 1/2% subordinated debentures of 2001 were at 101 5/8 after trading at below par earlier this week. 

Investment-grade bonds were unchanged.
Municipals 

Activity was brisk in the high-grade general obligation market, as a series of sell lists hit the Street and capped upward price movement in the sector. 

Traders estimated that more than $140 million of high-grade bonds was put up for sale via bid-wanted lists circulated by a handful of major brokers.
There was speculation that the supply was coming from a commercial bank's portfolios. 

According to market participants, the bonds were met with decent bids, but the volume of paper left high grades in the 10-year and under maturity range unchanged to 0.05 percentage point higher in yield. 

Away from the general obligation sector, activity was modest.
Long dollar bonds were flat to up 3/8 point. 

New Jersey Turnpike Authority's 7.20% issue of 2018 was up 3/8 at 98 3/8 bid to yield about 7.32%, down 0.03 percentage point. 

The debt of some California issuers pulled off lows reached after Tuesday's massive earthquake, although traders said market participants remained cautious. 

California expects to rely on federal emergency funds and its $1.06 billion in general fund reserves to meet the estimated $500 million to $1 billion in damages resulting from the quake, according to a state official. 

It's also unclear precisely how the state will rebuild its reserve, said Cindy Katz, assistant director of California's department of finance, although she noted that a bond offering for that purpose isn't anticipated. 

Meanwhile, new issuance was slow. 

The largest sale in the competitive arena was a $55.7 million issue of school financing bonds from the Virginia Public School Authority.
A balance of $25.8 million remained in late order-taking, according to the lead manager. 

Mortgage-Backed Securities 

Mortgage securities generally ended 6/32 to 9/32 point higher, but lagged gains in the Treasury market because of a shift in the shape of the Treasury yield curve and rumored mortgage sales by thrifts. 

Premium Government National Mortgage Association securities with coupon rates of 13% and higher actually declined amid concerns about increased prepayments because of a plan being considered by Congress to speed the refinancing of government-subsidized mortgages. 

Ginnie Mae 13% securities were down about 1/4 at 109 30/32. 

If the refinancing plan clears Congress, there could be fairly heavy prepayments on the premium securities, hurting any investor paying much above par for them. 

In the current-coupon sector, a shift in the Treasury yield curve resulting from the better performance of long-dated issues over short-dated securities hurt major coupons because it will become more difficult to structure new derivative securities offerings.
Ginnie Mae 9% securities ended at 98 6/32, up 9/32, and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. 9% securities were at 97 10/32, up 6/32.
The Ginnie Mae 9% issue was yielding 9.42% to a 12-year average life assumption, as the spread above the Treasury 10-year note widened 0.03 percentage point to 1.48. 

While Remic issuance may slow in the coming days because of the shift in the Treasury yield curve, underwriters continued to crank out new real estate mortgage investment conduits structured when the yield curve was more favorable. 

Two new Remics totaling $900 million were announced by Freddie Mac yesterday. 

Foreign Bonds 

British government bonds ended little changed as investors awaited an economic policy address last night by Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson. 

The Treasury 11 3/4% bond due 2003/2007 was down 2/32 at 111 29/32 to yield 10.09%, while the 11 3/4% notes due 1991 were unchanged at 98 19/32 to yield 12.94%. 

In Japan, the bellwether No. 111 4.6% bond of 1998 ended off 0.03 at 95.72, to yield 5.32%, and in West Germany, the 7% benchmark issue due October 1999 ended 0.05 point lower at 99.85 to yield 7.02%. 

