.START 

First they get us to buy computers so we can get more information.
Then the computers give us more information than we can ever read.
Now they plan to sell us products that sift through all the information to give us what we really want to know. 

The products range from computer-edited, personal newsletters to systems that sit inside a personal computer and pick stories on selected topics off news wires. 

"Filtered news is what people want," says Esther Dyson, editor of Release 1.0, an industry newsletter that spots new developments. "Most people read 10 times more than necessary in order to find out what they really need." 

Geoffrey Goodfellow, who dropped out of high school back in the 1970s to manage a computer network at a California research firm, says: "Old network hands have started to turn off the network because they don't have time to wade through the muck." Mr. Goodfellow has started a Menlo Park, Calif., company called Anterior Technology that provides human editors for public electronic networks. "I see it as a sewage treatment plant," he says. 

A new product, NewsEdge, carries five business news wires simultaneously into a user's computer and beeps and flashes whenever an article appears that is of interest to the user.
The product, developed by Desktop Data Corp., a new company based in Waltham, Mass., scans the wires looking for articles that contain key words specified by the user. 

One early user, David Semmel, a Chicago venture capitalist and investor in Desktop Data, says he uses it to track takeover developments.
He says he told NewsEdge to look for stories containing such words as takeover, acquisition, acquire, LBO, tender, merger, junk and halted. "I'm pretty confident I'm catching everything," he says. 

NewsEdge is pricey: $7,500 a year for a limited version, $40,000 a year if the cost of all the news wires is included.
And it works best in high-powered personal computers.
But some investors and consultants who have tried it are enthusiastic.
Jeffrey Tarter, editor of SoftLetter, a Watertown, Mass., industry newsletter, says: "I've seen a lot of people fooling around on the fringes of filtering information.
This is the first time I've seen something I could imagine a lot of people using." 

NewsEdge uses an FM radio band to carry news wires provided by Reuters, McGraw-Hill and Dow Jones & Co., as well as PR Newswire, which carries corporate press releases.
An FM receiver attached to a user's personal computer receives the information. 

Some organizations have devised their own systems to sort through news wire items as they come in.
George Goodwin, an account manager at Royal Bank of Canada, adapted a Lotus Development Corp. program called Agenda to sort through international news wires.
It automatically selects stories from particular countries for reading by the international bankers responsible for lending in those areas. 

For those who don't need their personalized information moment by moment, some services are offering overnight newsletters. 

Individual Inc., a new company in Brookline, Mass., uses filtering technology developed by Cornell University computer scientist Gerard Salton, to automatically produce customized newsletters it sends electronically to subscribers by 8 a.m. the next day. 

"We are operating an information refinery that takes a broad stream of raw data and turns it into actionable knowledge," says Yosi Amram, founder and president.
The daily newsletter, which isn't widely available yet, will have a base cost of $2,000 a year and provides full text of relevant articles under license agreements with Reuters, McGraw Hill, United Press International, two press release news wires and Japan's Kyodo news service. 

One early user is NEC Corp. 's U.S. printer marketing arm. "They want the full press releases on printer announcements by their competition," Mr. Amram says.
It also tracks personnel and financial announcements by NEC's distributors and customers. 

Individual Inc. 's technology goes beyond word searches by using a computerized thesaurus.
If a customer asks for stories about "IBM," the computer will also supply stories that mention "I.B.M., International Business Machines, or Big Blue," Mr. Amram says. 

Moreover, Individual Inc. 's computers can weigh the value of an article based on how closely the story matches the subscriber's interest area.
It compares the position of key words in the story; words in the headline or first paragraph get a higher value.
And it calculates how often the words appear in the story compared with how often they appear in the entire data base.
The higher the ratio of hits to total words, the higher the presumed value to the reader. 

Pinpoint Information Corp., Chantilly, Va., a producer of $1,800-a-year personalized newsletters about the computer industry that started full operation last month, relies on 12 human readers to code news releases by topic in order to select items for each subscriber. "The computers find all the key words they can, but the editors confirm every one.
Computer picking isn't perfect," says Harvey Golomb, president and founder of Pinpoint.
The humans also write abstracts of articles from some 200 computer industry publications. 

Once all the articles are coded and put in a data base, Pinpoint's computers pick the most relevant for each subscriber and lay them out in a three-to-five-page newsletter format; each newsletter is sent directly from the computer to the subscriber's fax machine.
Mr. Golomb says each of his computers can produce and send about 75 unique newsletters a night. 

Many computer network users who never see news wires would like to sort through their electronic mail automatically.
So-called E-mail is the collection of inter-office memos, gossip, technical data, schedules and directives distributed over local and national computer networks. 

"All these interconnected computers make it difficult to sort out what's junk and what's important," says Chuck Digate, a former Lotus Development executive who has started a new company to cope with the problem.
Mr. Digate says his firm, Beyond Inc., has licensed technology known as Information Lens from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and plans to develop it for commercial use. 

The MIT project devised ways for E-mail to be automatically categorized as top priority if it comes from certain designated senders or requires action in the next couple of days.
Mr. Digate says that Beyond will refine the product "so the message will be smart enough to know to come back and bother you again next week." And if a user is busy, "he can set it for crisis mode: `Don't bother me with reports until Monday. '" 

A program called Notes, which is under development by Lotus, also is designed to sort E-mail sent within work groups.
One thing that makes E-mail difficult to sift through is that each item looks the same.
Notes, which is designed for advanced computers that display graphics, allows mail senders to put different logos on their mail.
A daily news briefing from the company librarian, for example, would have a distinctive format on the screen, just as a paper version would have. 

"With E-mail, you don't have the visual clues of paper," says Mr. Tarter, the editor of SoftLetter. "With Notes, they're visually distinct." 

