.START 

After years of quarreling over Bonn's "Ostpolitik", West Germany and the U.S. appear to have shifted onto a united course in Eastern Europe. 

Bonn and Washington have taken a leading role in aid for the reformist countries, pledging billions of dollars in fresh credit and forgiving old debt while urging other industrial nations to follow suit.
Both hope to encourage pressure for change in East bloc countries still ruled by Stalinist holdouts by arranging liberal financial aid and trade benefits for Poland, Hungary and, to a lesser extent, the Soviet Union.
West German officials also have the special goal of holding out hope for East Germany's fledgling reform movement. 

"The change taking place in the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary has aroused new hope in both German states that reforms will be undertaken in {East Germany}, and that relations between the two German states, too, will get better," said Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher. 

Addressing a conference of the New York-based Institute for East-West Security Studies in Frankfurt yesterday, Mr. Genscher said, "History will judge us by whether we have taken the opportunities that emerge from these reforms." The ultimate aim of Western support for East bloc reforms, he said, is to create "an equitable and stable peaceful order in Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals." 

Mr. Genscher and U.S. Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher, in separate speeches at the conference, appealed for more Western contributions to economic reforms and business development in Hungary and Poland.
Bonn and Washington are leading supporters of Poland's request for a $1 billion stand-by credit from the International Monetary Fund. 

"We want the bold programs of market development and political freedom in Hungary and in Poland to succeed.
We are prepared to support those changes," said Mr. Mosbacher.
U.S. curbs on the exports of sensitive technology to East bloc countries will remain in place, however. 

Meanwhile, the U.S. House of Representatives yesterday approved an $837.5 million aid package for Poland and Hungary that more than doubles the amount President Bush had requested.
The package was brought to the House just 15 days after it was introduced, indicating Congress's eagerness to reward Poland and Hungary for their moves toward democracy and freemarket economic reforms. 

The legislation, approved 345-47 and sent to the Senate, establishes two enterprise funds, to be governed by independent nonprofit boards, which will make loans and investments in new business ventures in Hungary and Poland.
The Polish fund would be seeded with $160 million, the Hungarian fund with $40 million. 

In addition, a group of 24 industrialized countries, including the U.S. and Japan and coordinated by the European Community Commission, has promised Poland and Hungary trade advice and a line of credit equivalent to $1.11 billion through the European Investment Bank, while the EC plans $222 million in direct aid. 

When Chancellor Helmut Kohl travels to Poland Nov. 9, he is expected to take with him a promise of three billion West German marks ($1.6 billion) in new credit guarantees for industrial projects.
Last week, Bonn agreed to reschedule 2.5 billion marks in Polish debt that came due last year.
In addition, a one billion mark credit dating from 1974 is to be written off.
Poland's plan to switch to a free-market economy by 1991 is hampered by a foreign debt load of $39.2 billion. 

West Germany also has increased its credit guarantees to Hungary by 500 million marks to 1.5 billion marks as the emerging democratic state rushes through its own economic reforms, including a broad privatization of state-owned industry and tax incentives for industrial investment.
An additional 500 million marks in credit-backing was promised by the West German state governments of Bavaria and Baden-Wuerttemberg. 

Deutsche Bank AG, which last year arranged a three billion mark credit for the Soviet Union, is now moving to become the first West German bank to set up independent business offices in Hungary and Poland as they shift to free-market economies.
A maxim of Frankfurt banking holds that wherever Deutsche Bank goes, other West German banks follow.
Indeed, at least four other West German banks are believed to be making inquiries. 

