.START 

Investors celebrated the second anniversary of Black Monday with a buying spree in both stocks and bonds.
But the dollar was mixed. 

Stock and bond investors were cheered by last month's encouragingly low inflation rate.
This news raised hopes for further interest-rate cuts.
Treasury-bond prices immediately rallied, setting the stock market rolling from the opening bell. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average, up about 60 points in mid-afternoon, finished with a gain of 39.55 points, to 2683.20.
That brought the average's cumulative gain this week to about 114 points.
Since the 1987 crash, the industrials have soared more than 54%, and the widely watched market barometer is about 4% below its record high set earlier this month. 

The stock-market rally was led by blue-chip issues, but, unlike Monday's rebound, was broadly based.
Indeed, over-the-counter stocks, led by technology issues, outleaped the industrial average.
The Nasdaq Composite Index soared 7.52, or 1.6%, to 470.80, its highest one-day jump in points this year. 

Many takeover-related stocks rose after news that a group obtained financing commitments for the proposed buy-out of American Medical International Inc.
Among the biggest winners were brokerage-house stocks, responding to heavy trading volume. 

The government said consumer prices rose only 0.2% last month.
Economists expected twice as large an increase.
That news, plus recent signs of economic sluggishness, greatly increases pressure on the Federal Reserve to ease credit further, which in turn would be good news for stocks, investment managers say. "I see a lot of evidence indicating a slower economy, and that means my interest-rate outlook has a downward tilt," said Garnett L. Keith Jr., vice chairman of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, one of the nation's largest institutional investors.
Fed officials probably won't drive down rates immediately, Mr. Keith said.
Despite the inflation news, several Fed officials still fear consumer-price pressures will intensify because they insist the economy is stronger than generally believed. 

But Wall Street analysts expect further signs of economic weakness in government reports during the next few weeks.
If so, that will cinch the case for another shot of credit-easing within a month or so.
That, in turn, is expected to persuade banks to cut their prime lending rate, a benchmark rate on many corporate and consumer loans, by half a percentage point, to 10%. 

"We're not out of the woods yet by any means," said George R. Mateyo, president and chief executive of Carnegie Capital Management Co., Cleveland.
But the economy "is slowing enough to give the Federal Reserve leeway to reduce interest rates." 

But many individual investors are leery about stocks because of fresh signs of fragility in the huge junk-bond market. 

Investors also are anxious about today's "witching hour," the monthly expiration of stock-index futures and options, and options on individual stocks.
This phenomenon often makes stock prices swing wildly at the end of the trading session. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices surged in heavy trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange rose to 198.1 million shares from 166.9 million Wednesday.
Gaining Big Board issues outnumbered decliners by 1,235 to 355. 

The dollar was mixed.
In New York late yesterday, it was at 141.70 yen, up from 141.45 yen late Wednesday.
But it fell to 1.8470 marks from 1.8485. 

