.START 

Ford Motor Co. intensified its battle with General Motors Corp. over Jaguar PLC by saying it is prepared to make a bid for all of the British auto maker when restrictions on its shareholding are lifted. 

The statement was part of a Ford filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Ford didn't say how much it might offer for Jaguar, or when.
The British government currently forbids any outside investor from holding more than 15% of the company's shares without permission until Dec. 31, 

But with its stake in Jaguar, which it raised yesterday to 11.95%, Ford could convene a special Jaguar shareholders' meeting and urge holders to vote to drop the restriction sooner.
A successful vote would put pressure on the British government to lift the restriction. 

"We have not made that decision" to seek a Jaguar special shareholders' meeting, said Martyn Watkins, a Ford spokesman in London.
He emphasized that the car maker only would bid for all of Jaguar under the right circumstances, and said "those circumstances aren't right or possible at the moment." 

Last month, Ford announced plans to acquire as much as 15% of Jaguar.
Since then, Jaguar officials have confirmed that they are discussing an alliance with GM and said last week that they hoped to reach an agreement within a month. 

Analysts have been expecting a GM-Jaguar pact that would give the U.S. car maker an eventual 30% stake in the British company and create joint ventures that would produce an executive-model range of cars.
But the specter of Ford eventually launching a full-fledged bid could unravel the GM-Jaguar talks. 

Jaguar seems to be losing interest in giving GM a minority stake, said one individual close to the talks, adding, "It wouldn't surprise me if {Jaguar executives} want to wait and see what the color of that {Ford bid} is" first.
He predicted Ford officials will meet with Jaguar executives in the next week to outline their proposed offer.
Sir John Egan, Jaguar's chairman, so far has refused to meet with Ford officials, but he is believed to be willing to consider a specific bid proposal. 

As for GM, its "fallback position has to be a full bid itself," said Stephen Reitman, European auto-industry analyst at London brokers UBS-Phillips & Drew.
A Ford takeover of Jaguar would "have such implications for the balance of power in the 1990s that General Motors can't afford to step aside.
They will have to throw their hat in the ring." 

A GM spokesman yesterday reiterated the company's interest in acquiring a minority stake to help Jaguar remain independent. 

A pitched battle could mean Jaguar would fetch #10 ($16.02) a share, or about #1.8 billion ($2.88 billion), several analysts believe.
The prospect of such a takeover fight has sent Jaguar shares soaring in recent weeks.
U.S. takeover-stock speculators now own an estimated 25% of Jaguar shares.
In a declining London stock market yesterday, Jaguar shares were down four pence from Monday in late trading, at 694 pence ($11.11) a share.
In the U.S., Jaguar's American depositary receipts rose 12.5 cents in over-the-counter trading, to $11.25. 

Both Ford and GM badly need a luxury brand to combat new competition from the Japanese in the European and U.S. markets.
And financially strapped Jaguar has spent over a year looking for a rich uncle to provide cash and technological know-how.
The company has expressed a preference for GM over Ford because GM has promised it would keep Jaguar independent. 

Ford's need to acquire some or all of Jaguar became more acute last week when it abandoned a four-year effort to market its German-built Merkur Scorpio sedan as a European luxury import in the U.S. Then, last Friday, Ford's talks about a possible alliance with Saab-Scania AB of Sweden collapsed. 

GM's interest in Jaguar reflects a desire to help diversify the U.S. company's products in the growing luxury-car segment of the market.
Its Opel line has a solid image and a recent string of highly successful new models, but it lacks Jaguar's cachet.
GM officials also see a lot of potential in marrying Jaguar's cars to the technological know-how of Group Lotus PLC, a British engineering and specialty car maker GM bought in 1986. 

