.START 

Time Warner Inc. reported a third-quarter net loss of $176 million, or $2.88 cents a share, reflecting acquisition costs for a 59.3% stake in Warner Communications Inc. and the purchase method of accounting for the transaction. 

Separately, Warner reported a net loss of $106 million, or 56 cents a share, including merger expenses of $100 million and $120 million in charges associated with stock-appreciation-based compensation plans. 

Time Warner is in the process of completing its acquisition of the remaining Warner shares.
Time Warner emphasized in a news release that it should be evaluated based on its cash flow, which the company defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
On a pro-forma basis, assuming the merger was effective Jan 1, 1988, including the results from both Time Inc. and all of Warner, that cash flow figure would be $526 million for the latest quarter, more than double the comparable figure a year ago, or $242 million, according to Time Warner. 

Some analysts at least are buying that argument, and weren't alarmed by the losses. "What really matters is the operating income of the divisions: I look at these numbers and I say, these businesses are doing well," said Mark Manson, a vice president of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. "For example, Warner made more than $100 million from filmed entertainment in three months.
That's a big number.
Warner also had a gain of more than 13% from records and music publishing, even though the domestic record business was sluggish this summer." 

In the year-ago third quarter, Time on its own reported net income of $81 million, or $1.42 a share.
Combined revenue for the latest quarter of Time Warner was $2.2 billion, compared with the year-ago Time revenue of $1.1 billion. 

On a pro forma basis, including all of Warner's earnings, Time Warner had a third-quarter loss of $217 million, compared with a $342 million loss a year earlier.
On the same basis, revenue rose to $2.7 billion from $2.2 billion. 

For the third quarter, Warner's $106 million loss compared with a year-ago loss of $113 million, or 90 cents a share.
Revenue rose to $1.5 billion from $1.1 billion.
The 1988 figures were restated to include the results of Lorimar Telepictures Corp., which Warner acquired in January. 

Time Warner's operating earnings got a boost from Warner's record box-office results. "Batman" alone has racked up more than $247 million in box-office receipts to date, making it Warner Bros. ' largest grossing film ever. "Lethal Weapon II" was also a big hit.
Warner also contributed record results from its music business, where unit sales of compact discs rose more than 50% from a year ago, the company said, helped by Prince's "Batman" soundtrack. 

Time Warner said its cable division turned in a 77% increase in operating cash flow, to $166 million from $94 million, reflecting higher per-subscriber revenue.
In addition, the 1988 results included a $20 million charge reflecting a reserve for relocation related expenses at American Television & Communications Corp. 

On the other hand, Time Warner said its operating cash flow declined in the quarter for its magazine division, its books division and the Home Box Office programming division.
In magazines, higher advertising revenues at Sports Illustrated and Fortune were offset by lower ad revenue for other major magazines.
The programming division saw a decline in operating cash flow because the year-ago quarter included a $12 million dividend from Turner Broadcasting System and because the quarter includes expenses associated with the Nov. 15 launch of HBO's Comedy Channel. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Time Warner closed at $138.625 a share, up $1.875, while Warner closed at $63.875 a share, up 12.5 cents. 

