.START 

Residents of this city soon will be seeing ads urging them to visit "Cleveland's outdoor museum" -- Lake View Cemetery. 

Despite such famous tenants as oil magnate John D. Rockefeller, Lake View Cemetery has fallen on hard times.
So the inner-city burial ground is trying to resurrect itself with a television advertising campaign. 

The ads celebrate the achievements of some of Lake View's residents.
A spot honoring Bill White, the inventor of chewing gum, shows a woman trying to extricate her high-heeled shoe from a wad of gum. 

Another focuses on Charles Brush, the first person to light a city electrically.
It shows a boy hurling rocks at a street lamp.
Street lights, the ad points out, "helped sharpen the arm of many a budding baseball player." 

Cemetery officials hope the ads, which will begin airing next month, will not only draw visitors but bolster burials and endowment fund contributions.
Lake View had an operating deficit last year and has a poor reputation as an out-of-repair and crime-infested cemetery. 

The private, non-profit cemetery has had trouble competing against its for-profit counterparts, which use direct mail and other advertising to sell lots. "We don't want to be known as ambulance chasers," says William Garrison, Lake View's president. "We want people to think of Lake View as an historical park and educational experience. . . . A pleasant place to come and spend a few hours." 

Not all of the cemetery's better-known tenants lend themselves to the promotional job at hand, however.
For example, President James A. Garfield is entombed here, the victim of an assassination in 1881. (Mr.
Garrison notes, however, that the Garfield tomb is one of the nation's premier examples of Romanesque architecture.) 

Mr. Rockefeller, buried beneath a 180-foot-tall granite obelisk, didn't seem right for an ad either.
The oil magnate, who spent his later years passing out dimes to counter his penny-pinching image, "isn't terribly amusing," says Barry Olson, creative director at Innis-Maggiore-Olson, Canton, Ohio, which is producing the ads.
But there are plenty of other promising prospects at Lake View, promoters believe: Ernest Ball, for instance, who wrote "When Irish Eyes are Smiling," and Garrett Morgan, the inventor of the gas mask and the tri-colored traffic light. 

