.START 

Big gains for the ultra-right Republicans party in Baden-Wuerttemburg state municipal elections Sunday showed eroding support for Chancellor Helmut Kohl in a traditional bastion for his Christian Democratic Union. 

With ballots from most of the state's major cities in by yesterday morning, the Republicans came away with 10% of the vote in several of the key districts. 

With many rural districts yet to report ballots, election officials estimate support for Christian Democrats fell an average five percentage points statewide.
The left-of-center Social Democrats and the environmental Greens party posted mixed results. 

Headed by a former Waffen SS sergeant and working from a nationalistic platform of anti-foreigner rhetoric, the fledgling Republicans party has scored surprising gains in earlier elections in the states of West Berlin, Hesse and North-Rhine Westphalia. 

With West German unemployment remaining high at two million jobless and the lack of affordable housing becoming a primary issue for next year's campaign, the Republicans are seen drawing support for their "Germans First" stand on social-welfare issues. 

Election analysts acknowledge that a "Red-Green" coalition of Social Democrats and Greens could edge out Chancellor Kohl's coalition in the December 1990 national election if support for the Republicans continues to spread. 

International investigators urged Britain to allow prosecution of suspected Nazi war criminals who took refuge there after 1945.
Under current law, such suspects are immune from prosecution for acts committed while not British citizens. 

"If we're not careful we could become known as a haven for war criminals," said Jeff Rooker, a member of Parliament and one of several British politicians attending a London conference with government investigators from the U.S., Canada and Australia. 

A parliamentary inquiry found in July that more than 70 people living in Britain could have been part of death squads that roamed Nazi-occupied Eastern Europe.
Parliament is expected to discuss next month whether to change the law. 

British investigations were prompted by a list of 17 alleged war criminals living in Britain sent to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in October 1986 by the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles. 

In a sign of easing tension between Beijing and Hong Kong, China said it will again take back illegal immigrants caught crossing into the British colony.
China had refused to repatriate citizens who sneaked into Hong Kong illegally since early this month, when the colony allowed a dissident Chinese swimmer to flee to the U.S.
About 1,100 Chinese were awaiting repatriation yesterday. 

Italy's Foreign Ministry said it is investigating exports to the Soviet Union by an Ing.
C. Olivetti & Co. subsidiary called OCN-PPL that makes numerically controlled machine tools.
Although Italy's investigation of whether Olivetti had violated Western export-control rules had previously been made known, this marked the first time the unit and product were named.
The U.S. is worried about the convertibility of Olivetti's machine tools to military use.
However, an Olivetti spokeswoman said OCN-PPL, of which Olivetti sold the majority interest last year, "doesn't make equipment that has the type of precision necessary for sophisticated productions." 

Conservationists say that drift-net fishing threatens to wipe out much of the world's tuna stocks in a few years.
But the Japanese Fisheries Association criticized moves to ban the practice in international waters. "It is really unfortunate for human beings to be swayed by emotional discussions," the association said.
In driftnet, or "wall of death," fishing, fleets lay nets up to three miles long that trap almost everything in their path.
Earlier this year, Japan said it would cut the number of its drift-net vessels in the South Pacific by two-thirds, or down to 20. 

Workers at Peugeot S.A.'s car plant at Sochaux, in eastern France, voted to end a six-week-old strike that has cost the Peugeot group production of 60,000 automobiles, a company spokesman said.
The strikers voted to accept a series of management proposals that will give them a higher basic wage, better profit-sharing benefits and bigger annual bonuses.
The spokesman said the vote at Sochaux is expected to be followed by a similar move at the company's assembly plant at Mulhouse, where the number of strikers has been whittled down to 80. 

About 8,000 National Union of Mineworkers members resumed their strike against De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. after further negotiations to settle a wage dispute broke down.
Striking workers, who began striking five diamond mines on Oct. 13, had returned to work last week when the union and De Beers arranged to reopen negotiations.
A De Beers spokesman said yesterday the company had offered to increase the minimum wage by 18%, while the union was demanding 26.6%.
Before the two parties resumed talks last week, De Beers offered 17% and the union wanted 37.6%. 

China's People's Daily took note of the growing problem of computer fraud. 

Since the first fraud was discovered in July 1986 at an office of the People's Bank of China in Shenzhen, 15 major cases have been found, the paper said; the biggest was the theft of $235,000 from a bank in Chengdu in March 1988. 

The number of computers has mushroomed in recent years, with 10,000 in use, as well as 30,000 miniature models.
But security systems, effective management controls and regulations to govern their use have not kept pace, the People's Daily said. 

Besides money, criminals have also used computers to steal secrets and intelligence, the newspaper said, but it gave no more details. 

Japanese tourists will be told to take care when photographing earthquake damage in San Francisco, the Japan Association of Travel Agents said.
The association issued an advisory to its 1,685 member agencies following a report from the Foreign Ministry that picture-taking by Japanese tourists in earthquake-stricken areas was causing ill feeling among local residents. . . . Tass said Lenin's tomb in Red Square will be closed from Nov. 10 to Jan. 15 for essential maintenance.
The red granite mausoleum draws thousands of visitors daily. 

