.START 

Bond prices took the high road and stock prices took the low road as worries mounted about the economy and the junk bond market. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 26.23 points to 2662.91 in sluggish trading.
But long-term Treasury bonds staged a modest rally, with prices on most issues rising about half a point, or $5 for each $1,000 face amount.
The dollar sagged against other major currencies in lethargic trading. 

Traders and analysts said the divergence between the stock and bond markets is a sign of growing unease about the economic outlook.
A sinking economy depresses corporate earnings and thus stock prices, but it buoys bond prices as interest rates fall. 

That unease is expected to grow today when the government reports on September durable goods orders and again Thursday when the first assessment of third-quarter economic growth is released.
Analysts say they think durable goods orders fell about 1%, compared with a 3.9% gain in August, and that growth in the third quarter slowed to about 2.3% from the second quarter's 2.5%. 

The stock market's decline, coming after a record weekly gain of 119.88 points, surprised some investors.
But A.C. Moore, director of research at Argus Research, said last week's rally was a reflex reaction to the Oct. 13 stock market rout.
Overall, he said, the trend in stock prices will be down as the economy weakens. 

"We think we're on target in looking for renewed economic deterioration," he said. "Corporate profits are going to decrease faster than interest rates will fall, and the probability is that we'll see negative economic growth in the fourth quarter." 

Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany Corp., agreed that a deteriorating economy is worrisome, but he said the real concern among stock investors is that some new problem will crop up in the junk bond market. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices slumped in sluggish trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 135.9 million shares.
Declining issues on the Big Board were ahead of gainers, 1,012 to 501. 

Bond prices rallied.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond slipped to 7.93%. 

The dollar weakened against most other major currencies.
In late New York trading, the dollar was quoted at 1.8470 marks and 141.90 yen, compared with 1.8578 marks and 142.43 yen late Friday. 

