.START 

Union Carbide Corp. said third-quarter net income plunged 35% from a year earlier on weakness in the company's mainstay chemicals and plastics business. 

Net was $139 million, or 98 cents a share, for the quarter, compared with $213 million, or $1.56 a share, a year ago. 

Sales were $2.14 billion, up 1.6% from $2.11 billion the previous year. 

Carbide, like other companies with a heavy reliance on the so-called commodity end of the chemicals industry, was expected to post earnings sharply lower than in an exceptionally strong 1988 third quarter.
But the company's latest quarter was a few pennies a share lower than the more pessimistic projections on Wall Street. 

"It certainly wasn't a disaster, but it does show weakness" in some of the company's chief markets, said George Krug, a chemicals-industry analyst at Oppenheimer & Co. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Carbide closed at $24.50 a share, down 50 cents. 

Prices for polyethylene, a common plastic and an important Carbide product, started to fall early this year; the slide accelerated in the third quarter as buyers continued to trim inventories.
Prices also fell for ethylene oxide and glycols, products used in making antifreeze. 

Some producers of polyethylene, figuring the inventory reductions are near an end, have announced price boosts.
The first real test of whether prices have hit bottom may come in the next several weeks, when the new prices become effective.
A Carbide spokesman said "the conditions are right for the increase to hold." 

For the third quarter, operating profit from Carbide's chemicals and plastics business fell to $238 million from $352 million a year ago, before accounting for taxes and interest expense.
Operating profit from carbon products, such as graphite electrodes, also declined, to $6 million from $20 million.
In the industrial-gases segment, operating profit climbed to $87 million from $58 million. 

The latest quarter included a gain of about $62 million on the sale of the company's urethane polyols and propylene glycols businesses.
Propylene glycols are used in making personal-care products such as shampoo, and urethane polyols are used in making the polyurethane foam found in furniture cushioning and other products. 

That gain was mostly offset by a loss of about $55 million from a write-down in its polysilicon business.
Polysilicon is used in making integrated circuits. 

For the nine months, net totaled $526 million, or $3.74 a share, up 5% from $501 million, or $3.71 a share, a year ago. 

Sales rose 7.7% to $6.66 billion from $6.19 billion. 

