.START 

EAST GERMANY'S KRENZ WARNED against further pro-democracy protests. 

After the legislature confirmed him as the Communist Party leader, Krenz said demonstrations to demand democratic freedoms could cause a "worsening of the situation, or confrontation." He also reaffirmed East Germany's allegiance to Communist orthodoxy.
But as many as 12,000 people marched in East Berlin after the speech to protest his election.
During the balloting, 26 members of the 500-seat Parliament voted against Krenz, a move considered unprecedented in the country's 40-year history. 

Officials in East Berlin, responding to complaints from opposition groups, admitted police used excessive force in dispersing protesters this month. 

The Iran-Contra judge agreed to allow Poindexter to subpoena the personal papers of ex-President Reagan, ruling that there was sufficient evidence that the data would be important to the defense.
But the judge denied a request by the former national security adviser, who faces five criminal charges, to seek documents from Bush. 

San Francisco Bay area officials said nine people remain missing in the aftermath of last week's earthquake.
The death toll rose to 63.
The House, meanwhile, approved $2.85 billion to aid in the recovery from the temblor and from Hurricane Hugo as state legislators moved toward a temporary sales-tax increase. 

U.S. officials expressed skepticism over an Israeli effort to show the PLO continues to practice terrorism.
Israel provided the State Department with a list of recent alleged terrorist incidents attributed to forces controlled by Arafat, but the U.S. said it wasn't satisfied that the incidents constituted terrorism. 

TV evangelist Jim Bakker was sentenced to 45 years in prison and fined $500,000 for defrauding followers of his PTL ministry.
Bakker, who was immediately taken into custody, was convicted Oct. 5 by a federal court jury in Charlotte, N.C., of fraud and conspiracy for diverting more than $3.7 million of ministry funds for personal use. 

Lawmakers in Moscow voted to deny the Communist Party its 100 guaranteed seats in the Soviet Congress, meaning Gorbachev and other aides might have to face voters.
In Warsaw, Shevardnadze held his first talks with the Solidarity-led government and vowed to maintain fuel supplies.
Poland's premier is to visit Moscow next month. 

The Arab League pledged an accord for a complete Syrian troop pullout from Lebanon, where about 70,000 people marched to the headquarters of Christian leader Aoun to support his rejection of a peace plan approved Sunday by Lebanon's legislature.
The plan lacked a withdrawal timetable. 

Pro-Iranian kidnappers renewed an offer to trade their captives in Lebanon for at least 15 Shiite Moslem comrades jailed in Kuwait.
The statement by Islamic Jihad, which holds at least two U.S. hostages, was accompanied by a photograph of Associated Press correspondent Terry Anderson, longest held of 18 Western hostages. 

The Treasury Department said S&Ls reject blacks for mortgage loans twice as often as they reject whites.
The department's Office of Thrift Supervision said that doesn't necessarily mean thrifts are biased, but conceded that it doesn't have data about applicants to determine why blacks are rejected more often. 

Emergency crews searched through the charred rubble of a Phillips Petroleum Co. plastics plant near Pasadena, Texas, where a series of explosions Monday killed at least two people and injured 124.
Company officials said 22 workers were missing and presumed dead.
Safety authorities didn't immediately know the cause of the blasts. 

NATO defense ministers opened a two-day meeting in Portugal to assess the alliance's nuclear-weapons needs amid reduced East-West tensions.
The ministers ordered a study on the strategic role of nuclear arms in Western Europe once Soviet conventional weapons are reduced in the East bloc. 

The Justice Department scrambled to play down the significance of revised guidelines concerning prosecutions under the federal racketeering law.
The guidelines, which discourage prosecutors from seeking court orders seizing the assets of certain racketeering defendants prior to trial, were first disclosed this week. 

Died: S. Clark Beise, 91, ex-president and chief executive officer of Bank of America NT&SA, Saturday, in Hillsboro, Calif. 

