.START 

but worries about 1990. 

With most legislatures adjourned for the year, small business is tallying its scorecard.
Much of its attention was spent fighting organized labor's initiatives on issues the small-business community traditionally opposes -- from raising state minimum wage levels to mandating benefits in health plans.
While results were mixed in many states, "small business got by fairly well," concludes Don L. Robinson, associate director of the National Federation of Independent Business, the largest small-business organization. 

Five states -- Oregon, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Iowa and Wisconsin -- passed bills to boost the minimum wage, but measures in 19 other states were defeated.
Oregon's rate will rise to $4.75 an hour, the nation's highest, in Jan. 1, 1991.
Iowa's will be the second highest -- at $4.65 an hour in January 1992 -- but small-business lobbyists won an exclusion for tiny concerns and a lower training rate. 

In 17 central states, one small-business count shows lawmakers adopted only three of 46 bills mandating health coverage or parental leave.
The Illinois Legislature narrowly passed a parental-leave bill, which Gov. James Thompson vetoed, and Iowa and Tennessee amended laws to require that employers pay for breast-cancer exams. 

Small business is bracing for an avalanche of similar proposals next year. 

"Those kinds of issues always keep coming back," says Robert Beckwith, who manages the Illinois Chamber of Commerce's small-business office. 

DESPITE VICTORIES this year, small business fears losing parental-leave war. 

Only two states -- Vermont and Washington -- this year joined five others requiring private employers to grant leaves of absence to employees with newborn or adopted infants.
Similar proposals were defeated in at least 15 other states.
But small business, which generally detests government-mandated benefits, has taken note of the growing number of close votes. "It's just a matter of time before the tide turns," says one Midwestern lobbyist. 

Consequently, small business is taking more "pro-active" steps to counter mandated leaves.
In Pennsylvania, small businesses are pushing for a voluntary alternative; they favor a commission that would develop sample leave policies that employers could adopt.
They also support a tax credit for employers to offset the cost of hiring and training workers who temporarily replace employees on parental leave. 

In 1990, the issue is expected to be especially close in Alaska, California, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania and Illinois. 

"We'll be playing a lot of defense, especially in the Midwest and Northeast," says Jim Buente of the NFIB. 

IN LOS ANGELES, more small businesses ponder adopting a child-care policy. 

Triggering the re-examination is a recent city council decision to give preference in letting city contracts to suppliers with a stated policy on child care for their employees.
The preferential treatment even applies to awarding small contracts under $25,000 and consulting and temporary services -- which often go to the smaller concerns.
Firms are permitted wide flexibility in the child-care arrangements they provide.
Council member Joy Picus, the measure's chief advocate, considers it part of a "pro-family policy" that makes Los Angeles a leader in "humanizing the workplace." 

NOVEMBER BALLOTS will contain few referendum or initiative issues that especially affect small business.
In San Francisco, small businesses are urging passage of a local initiative to build a new $95 million downtown baseball stadium; they believe it will spur retail sales and hotel-restaurant business.
But in Washington state, small business generally opposes an initiative to boost spending on children's programs by $360 million, fearing the state's 7.8% sales tax will be raised to finance the outlays. 

DIALING DOLLARS: Small businesses in suburban Chicago are discovering that an area-code switch Nov. 11 -- to 708 from the familiar 312 -- won't be without some costs as they alter stationery, among other things, and notify customers.
Wessels & Pautsch, a small St. Charles law firm, plans to mail 500 customers a list of its lawyers' new phone and fax numbers as well as updated Rolodex cards.
But many owners plan to practice frugality -- crossing out the old code and writing in the new one until their stock runs out.
Even print-shop operator Clay Smith of Naperville won't discard his old supply. (He reports his business is up slightly from customers replacing old stock.) 

CALIFORNIA, A TREND-SETTER in franchising rules, stirs a controversy. 

With some new rules, state officials say they made it easier -- and faster -- to sell new franchises whose terms stray from those in state-registered contracts.
Previously, regulators insisted that franchisers pre-register such changes with the state -- a costly process taking at least six weeks.
Now some negotiated sales that meet a series of tests don't have to be pre-registered.
For instance, franchisers no longer must pre-register sales to aspiring franchisees who qualify as "sophisticated purchasers." Such buyers must have a minimum net worth of $1 million, $200,000 annual income, or recent experience in the business area of the franchise being sold. 

But critics consider the changes regressive.
Lewis G. Rudnick, a Chicago lawyer who represents franchisers, contends California is narrowly limiting -- rather than expanding -- opportunities for negotiating sales.
He argues California regulators historically have misinterpreted their law -- and he says negotiated sales that aren't pre-registered have been legal all along. 

San Francisco lawyer Timothy H. Fine, who represents franchisees, insists California's cautiousness helps protect franchisees from crafty sales negotiators who push unlawful clauses. 

SMALL TALK: A new Maryland law frees store owners of liability if a customer trips or otherwise gets hurt on the way to the restroom. . . . Only 4% of Missouri small businesses surveyed say they've tested an employee or applicant for drug or alcohol use. . . . By 52%-36%, Tennessee NFIB members favor laws to limit foreign ownership of land and facilities in the state. 

