.START 

Ramada Inc. revised the terms of its restructuring and extended to Feb. 28, 1990, the deadline to complete the sale of its hotel business to New World Development Co. of Hong Kong and Prime Motor Inns Inc. of Fairfield, N.J. 

Ramada's previous plan was derailed by upheaval in the junk-bond market that hindered the offering of $400 million in high-yield securities of Aztar Corp., the new company that will operate Ramada's casinos in Nevada and Atlantic City, 

Under the new terms, New World will still pay $540 million for Ramada's hotel business, subject to adjustment at closing, but Ramada will now reimburse New World for $10 million in expenses.
Prime will still manage Ramada's domestic franchise system when the sale closes. 

Revised terms call for each Ramada common share to be exchanged for $1 in cash, subject to possible reduction, and one share of Aztar common stock.
Shareholders will also receive one cent per share for the redemption of preferred stock purchase rights. 

The cash payout will be reduced by 40% of any amount by which the weighted mean price of Ramada's common stock exceeds $14 on the day the transaction closes.
The provision will help provide for tax liabilities that may stem from the restructuring. 

Ramada's stock rose 87.5 cents on the news to close at $11.25 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.
The announcement dispelled some Wall Street observers' fears that New World might demand a huge premium for the delay, or scrap the deal entirely.
The previous deadline to complete the sale was Nov. 30. 

One major advantage of the revised plan is that Aztar will have far less debt than under the old terms. "They'll go from being one of the most leveraged to one of the least leveraged casino companies," said Daniel Lee, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Mr. Lee values the package at between $15 and $20 a share, based on current trading prices of other casino-company stocks. 

The much-revised restructuring, which was first announced in October 1988, must again be approved by shareholders and state casino regulators in Nevada and New Jersey.
Financing plans include raising $170 million in debt secured by the company's holdings in New Jersey. 

In May, Ramada sold its Marie Callender Pie Shops Inc. unit to a group of private investors as part of its plan to focus on its casinos in Atlantic City and in Las Vegas and Laughlin, Nev. 

