.START 

MINORITY RECRUITING has yet to meet hopes raised by Bush administration. 

Six months ago, as some personnel specialists saw it, a perception that President Bush really cared about fair employment -- after what they said was eight years of Reagan-era neglect -- was prodding top management to raise hiring goals for females, blacks and other minorities.
The perception lingers, says an official at a major industrial company.
But so far, he declares, there's little evidence the "new urgency" is trickling down to the managers who actually do hiring. "Is there really a commitment or an illusion of activity?" he asks. 

The recruiting "hasn't materialized," asserts Jeffrey Christian, who runs a search agency.
Samuel Hall, Howard University's placement director, also doesn't see it.
And he questions the White House dedication. "I don't think the Bush administration has done anything," he says.
Recruiter Donald Clark does note an increase in searches for minority candidates. 

But some of the activity, he says, may reflect a rush to get "numbers in order" for end-of-year reports. 

PAY FOR PERFORMANCE hangs mostly on boss's subjective view. 

Du Pont Co. in a couple of units has installed objective tests based on earnings or return on equity.
Many companies have set up machinery to assure workers a fair shake.
At most firms, though, it's the immediate supervisor who decides the merit increases subordinates will be paid.
Managers have "some very broad discretion," says an official at Walt Disney Co. Unocal Corp. 's top management sets guidelines, but line supervisors slice up the merit pie. 

Lotus Development Corp. feeds its evaluations into a computer, but only for storage; the decisions are made by supervisors.
Hershey Foods Corp. strives for fairness by basing increases on quarterly reviews, annual appraisals and meetings with workers.
At Chemfix Technology Inc., each supervisor's recommendation must be approved by the next boss up the line, and then sanctioned by a salary review committee. 

JAPANESE COMPANIES fare best in U.S. when they give Americans more say. 

University of Michigan researchers find the companies earn more and win a bigger market share when their American employees get a voice in planning, product development and design, including decision-making back in Japan. "You can't hire competent Americans and say, `Let them run only their own show, '" says Vladimir Pucik, who headed the study run with Egon Zehnder International, a search firm. 

The researchers say many Japanese companies err in the U.S. by adopting the American practice of hiring managers on the "open market." In Japan, by contrast, companies tend to develop their own talent and promote from within.
The Japanese also are accused of keeping their cards too close to their vests. "Some Japanese executives are not yet . . . comfortable about sharing strategic information with their American colleagues," the researchers say. 

Americans stay longer with Japanese firms than American companies.
But they think promotions are limited. 

THE HOUSE votes down a proposal to put pension plans under the control of joint labor-management boards.
Some consultants had insisted it wouldn't work. 

LONG-TERM care insurance gains favor.
More than half the people surveyed for the Employee Benefit Research Institute say they would be willing and able to pick up most of the cost of the coverage. 

FRINGE-BENEFIT spending by small and medium-sized employers has dropped to 25% of payroll from 29% three years ago, says the National Institute of Business Management, an advisory service. 

OUSTED EXECUTIVES over 50 years old take slightly less time than their younger colleagues to find a job -- 3.23 months vs. 3.26 for the juniors -- outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas finds.
It's the first time in the survey's 15 years that the over-50 group came out ahead. 

FEAR OF AIDS hinders hiring at few hospitals.
Dedication runs high. 

Wafaa El-Sadr, who heads the AIDS program at New York City's Harlem Hospital Center, can't find help. "I've been recruiting every single day since it's been identified that many AIDS patients come from the inner city," she says.
She was the only staff physician available to treat AIDS patients last summer and now she has the help of only two doctors part time.
Part of the problem, though, may reflect a general unwillingness to work with the urban poor. 

Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas says it hasn't had any problem recruiting, even after a nurse contracted the virus while injecting an AIDS patient. "I can tell you that nobody quit over it.
No one panicked," a spokeswoman says.
St. Paul Medical Center, also in Dallas, sees only a "minimal erosion" of support staff due to AIDS. Yale-New Haven Hospital sees no problem, says John Fenn, the chief of staff. 

"There are enough enlightened and spirited individuals who know their responsibilities," he says. 

THE CHECKOFF: At least somebody gains on layoffs.
The Association of Outplacement Consulting Firms says the industry's volume has soared tenfold since 1980, to $350 million a year. . . . And somebody loses on the expected repeal of Section 89, the benefits test fought by most employers.
Triad Solutions says software producers had each invested hundreds of thousands of dollars in programs that now have no use. 

