.START 

Some House Democrats are trying to head off an appointment by President Bush to the board that oversees the savings-and-loan bailout, contending that the prospective nominee is the head of troubled banks himself. 

Four Democrats on the House Banking Committee sent President Bush a letter stating their concerns about the expected appointment of James Simmons, an Arizona banker and former fund-raiser for Mr. Bush, to the Oversight Board of the Resolution Trust Corp. 

The Oversight Board, created in the savings-and-loan law signed in August, sets policy for the RTC, which will sell hundreds of the nation's sick thrifts and billions of dollars of their assets.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp are members of the board.
President Bush must appoint two other members, one a Democrat and one a Republican. 

An administration official confirmed last week that Mr. Simmons, the chairman of Valley National Bank in Phoenix, is the Republican appointee, and that a security clearance was under way.
The Democratic appointee hasn't been determined, the official said. 

Mr. Simmons declined to comment, and the White House said the congressmen's letter is under review. 

The letter, dated last Thursday, cited the losses at Valley National, and at United Bank, also of Phoenix, where Mr. Simmons was chairman for 29 years.
Both banks have been battered, as have other Arizona banks, by falling real estate prices.
Valley National, for example, had $470 million in problem assets as of June. 

"We believe that there are numerous other candidates more qualified for this important position and we encourage you to give them your thorough consideration before making this key RTC appointment," the letter said. "The RTC needs the most able, competent management available." 

But Mr. Simmons has long ties to both Republicans and banking.
He was co-chairman of Mr. Bush's Arizona campaign committee in last year's election, and also worked for Mr. Bush in the 1980 election.
The two met more than 30 years ago, when Mr. Simmons worked for Commercial Bank & Trust Co. of Midland, Texas, where Mr. Bush was an organizing director. 

In 1986, Mr. Simmons also served on a committee of businessmen headed by William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the Resolution Trust Corp.
That committee determined to open Arizona to banking across state lines.
Arizona Trend magazine referred to Mr. Simmons this year as one of the 25 most influential people in the state. 

The letter to Mr. Bush was signed by Reps. Bruce Vento (D., Minn.), the chairman of the Banking Committee's RTC Task Force, Thomas McMillen (D., Md.), Kweisi Mfume (D., Md.) and Paul Kanjorski (D., Pa.). 

