.START 

Americans are drinking less, but young professionals from Australia to West Germany are rushing to buy premium-brand American vodka, brandy and other spirits.
In particular, many are snubbing the scotch preferred by their parents and opting for bourbon, the sweet firewater from the Kentucky countryside. 

With U.S. liquor consumption declining steadily, many American producers are stepping up their marketing efforts abroad.
And those efforts are paying off: Spirits exports jumped more than 2 1/2 times to $157.2 million in 1988 from $59.8 million in 1983, according to the Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S., a trade group. 

"Spirits companies now view themselves as global marketers," says Michael Bellas, president of Beverage Marketing Corp., a research and consulting firm. "If you want to be a player, you have to be in America, Europe and the Far East.
You must have world-class brands, a long-term perspective and deep pockets." 

The internationalization of the industry has been hastened by foreign companies' acquisitions of many U.S. producers.
In recent years, for example, Grand Metropolitan PLC of Britain acquired Heublein Inc., while another British company, Guinness PLC, took over United Distillers Group and Schenley Industries Inc. 

But the shift has also been fueled by necessity.
While premium-brand spirits like Smirnoff vodka and Jack Daniel's whiskey are riding high in the U.S., domestic spirits consumption fell 15% to 141.1 million cases in 1988 from 166 million cases in 1979. 

In recent years, growth has come in the foreign markets.
U.S. brandy exports more than doubled last year to 360,000 proof gallons, a standard industry measure, according to Jobson Beverage Alcohol Group, an industry association.
Exports of rum surged 54% to 814,000 proof gallons.
Mexico is the biggest importer of both rum and brandy from the U.S. 

Japan, the world's third-largest liquor market after the U.S. and Britain, helped American companies in April when it lowered its tax on imported spirits and levied a tax on many domestic products.
California wineries, benefiting from lowered trade barriers and federal marketing subsidies, are expanding aggressively into Japan, as well as Canada and Great Britain.
In Japan, the wineries are promoting their products' Pacific roots and courting restaurant and hotel chefs, whose recommendations carry weight. 

In Australia, Britain, Canada and Greece, Brown-Forman Corp. has increased its marketing of Southern Comfort Liqueur.
Using cinema, television and print ads, the company pitches Southern Comfort as a grand old drink of the antebellum American South. 

The biggest foreign inroads, though, have been made by bourbon.
While U.S. makers of vodka, rum and other spirits compete against powerhouses abroad, trade agreements prohibit any other country from making bourbon. (All bourbon comes from Kentucky, though Jack Daniel's Tennessee whiskey often is counted as bourbon because of similarity of taste.) Moreover, just as vodka has acquired an upscale image in the U.S., bourbon has become fashionable in many foreign countries, a uniquely American product tied to frontier folklore.
How was the West won?
With a six-shooter in one hand and bourbon in the other. 

"We imagine with bourbon the Wild West, Western motion pictures and gunmen appearing," says Kenji Kishimoto, vice president of Suntory International Corp., a division of Suntory Ltd., Japan's largest liquor company.
Suntory distributes Brown-Forman bourbons in Japan. 

Bourbon makes up just 1% of world-wide spirits consumption, but it represented 57% of U.S. liquor exports last year, according to Jobson; no other category had more than 19%.
Big U.S. distillers are fiercely vying for this market, which grew to $77 million last year from $33 million in 1987, according to government figures. 

Jim Beam Brands Co., a division of American Brands Inc., is the leading exporter of bourbon and produces 10 other types of liquor.
The company says it will increase its international advertising 35% in 1990, with bourbon representing most of that amount. 

Guinness's Schenley Industries unit has increased its TV advertising in Japan and has built partnerships with duty-free shops throughout Asia, enabling it to install prominent counter displays.
The company's I.W. Harper brand is the leading bourbon in Japan, with 40% of the market. 

Bourbon exporters have succeeded in Japan where other industries have failed, avoiding cultural hitches in marketing and distribution by allying themselves with local agents.
Jim Beam Brands has a distribution partnership with Nikka Whiskey Co., a distiller.
Seagram Co., which exports Four Roses bourbon, has such a link with Kirin Brewery Co. 

Some bourbon makers advertise abroad as they do at home.
To promote Jack Daniel's overseas, Brown-Forman uses the same photos of front porches from Lynchburg, Va., and avuncular old men in overalls and hightops. 

Jim Beam print ads, however, strike different chords in different countries.
In Australia, land of the outback, a snapshot of Jim Beam lies on a strip of hand-tooled leather.
West Germans get glitz, with bourbon in the foreground and a posh Beverly Hills hotel in the background.
Ads for England are artsy and irreverent.
One ad features a huge robot carrying a voluptuous woman in a faint.
The tagline: "I only asked if she wanted a Jim Beam." 

