.START 

Silicon Graphics Inc., a fast-growing maker of computer workstations, said it landed two federal government contracts worth more than $100 million over the next five years. 

One award is part of a Department of Defense contract to Loral Rolm Mil-Spec Computers and could be valued at more than $100 million over five years.
The other involves the sale of about 35 of the company's high-end workstations to the National Institutes of Health.
The models, which cost about $75,000 each, will be used in research. 

The awards are evidence that Silicon Graphics' approach to computer graphics is catching on with users of powerful desktop computers, analysts said. 

"The company's on a roll," said Robert Herwick, an analyst at Hambrecht & Quist. "No other {computer} vendor offers graphics performance that good for their price." 

In the battle to supply desktop computers for researchers and design engineers, most of the attention is given to the biggest competitors: Sun Microsystems Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co. and Digital Equipment Corp., which make computers mainly aimed at a wide range of engineering and scientific needs. 

Silicon Graphics, on the other hand, has targeted a specific niche since its inception in 1982, which has been dubbed by some as "motion-picture computing." This is a style of "visual" computing that provides three-dimensional, color models of everything from the inside of a house to the latest in women's fashion. 

Though Silicon Graphics is much smaller than Digital, Hewlett and Sun, it has emerged in recent years as a feared adversary in this graphics portion of the workstation market. 

In addition, the company has made it tough on competitors by offering a stream of desktop computers at sharply lower prices.
A year ago, Silicon Graphics introduced a model priced at $15,000 -- almost as cheap as mainstream workstations that don't offer special graphics features. 

Silicon Graphics also plans to unveil even less expensive machines in the near future. "It's pretty safe to assume we can bring the cost down of these systems by 30% to 40% a year," said Edward McCracken, the company's chief executive officer. 

Silicon Graphics' strategy seems to be paying off.
Revenue for its first quarter ended Sept. 30 was $86.4 million, a 95% increase over the year-ago period.
Profit was $5.2 million, compared with $1 million for the year-ago quarter. 

