.START 

Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. 's common stock was dragged down yesterday amid concerns that a bankruptcy filing by a Finnish shipbuilder would delay delivery of three big cruise ships. 

The Miami-based company's stock fell $1.75 yesterday to $20.75 a share in heavy American Stock Exchange composite trading.
Early yesterday, Carnival said in a company statement that it had been "notified unofficially" that Waertsilae Marine Industries, the Finnish shipyard that is building its three new cruise ships, planned to file for bankruptcy.
Officials at Carnival declined to comment. 

"There is just a tremendous amount of uncertainty about what the effect, if any, of all this is," said John P. Uphoff, an analyst at Raymond James Associates Inc. "I didn't even know that a company in a socialistic country could file for bankruptcy." 

Carnival said the "Fantasy," the first of the three $200 million ships that Carnival has on order, is scheduled to be delivered next month, just in time for the winter tourist season in the Caribbean.
That ship, which would carry about 2,050 passengers, would expand the capacity of Carnival's existing 14-ship fleet by 24%.
The second ship, which is half-completed, is scheduled to be delivered in fall 1990, and the third in fall 1991. 

"There's a 99% chance that the Fantasy will be delivered close to schedule," said Caroline Levy, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. "The others will probably be delivered as well, but Carnival will likely have to pay a higher price for them." She said the company could pay as much as 25% more for the ships. 

If the ships aren't delivered, however, it will likely have an effect on the company's earnings as soon as the 1990 fiscal year, which begins Dec. 1.
Analysts said those estimates -- which range from about $1.80 a share to $1.95 a share -- are based on Fantasy being in operation in 1990.
If the ship fails to arrive, those per-share earnings estimates could be trimmed 15 cents or more. 

Analysts weren't willing to speculate on how much money Carnival might lose through deposits.
Normally, a company pays a portion of the total cost of a ship as it reaches various stages of construction.
Carnival, for example, has already paid about $160 million of the total cost for Fantasy.
Some analysts say this may give it the right to seize the ship if the situation warrants it. 

According to reports from Finland, Waertsilae Marine, 19%-owned by conglomerate Oy Waertsilae, filed for bankruptcy yesterday after the shipyard's contractors had started to demand bank guarantees.
The shipyard disclosed in mid-August that it expected losses stemming from a series of unprofitable orders. 

