.START 

Stock of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. gyrated wildly yesterday amid speculation that one or more investors may challenge the UAL board's decision to remain independent instead of pursuing a buy-out or other transaction. 

The board's decision, announced after the market closed Monday, initially prompted a severe sell-off in UAL shares, which at midday traded as low as $145 a share, down $33 a share, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

The deepening bloodbath for takeover-stock traders, who by then had seen UAL stock tumble 49% since Oct. 12, also triggered a marketwide sell-off that sent the Dow Jones Industrial Average down more than 80 points at 10:40 a.m. 

But then steady, concentrated buying by Bear, Stearns & Co., which frequently buys stock for corporate raiders, took hold and steadied the fall in UAL, which eventually buoyed the entire market.
The industrial average closed down only 3.69 points at 2659.22. 

Late in the afternoon, several big purchases by Bear, Stearns, particularly a block of 200,000 shares at 2:43 p.m. at $150 a share, triggered a buying spree that took UAL up more than 18 points in the final hour of trading. 

UAL stock closed at $170 a share, down $8.375.
Volume was a tumultuous 4.9 million shares, or 22% of the 21.8 million UAL shares outstanding.
Traders estimated that Bear, Stearns bought more than 1 million shares. 

The two most frequently rumored buyers, neither of whom would comment, were Coniston Partners, which battled the UAL board in 1987, and New York real estate developer Donald Trump, who recently made and withdrew an offer for American Airlines parent AMR Corp. However, one person familiar with UAL said the signs pointed to Coniston because Mr. Trump hasn't asked for permission to buy more than $15 million of stock under federal antitrust rules. 

Takeover-stock traders, stung by their huge losses in UAL stock, remained eager for some action by an outside catalyst following the collapse Oct. 13 of a $300-a-share, $6.79 billion labor-management buy-out.
Their hope was that the catalyst would seek to oust the board in a solicitation of shareholder consents. 

Baker, Nye Investments, a New York takeover-stock trader that owns UAL stock, wouldn't comment on reports the firm is considering seeking such a shareholder vote.
But partner Richard Nye said, "This is the most extraordinary failed transaction I've seen in 25 years in this business.
It would make sense for somebody to do it.
I have never seen a case of incompetence shared by so many participants." 

In 1986, Baker, Nye waged a proxy fight for control of Leaseway Transportation Inc. that ultimately led to Leaseway's being sold. 

Some traders pointed hopefully to earlier estimates by UAL's investment adviser, First Boston Corp., that recapitalizations could yield $245 to $280 a share.
But those would require pilots' cooperation. 

Any investor who acquires UAL stock in an attempt to force a buy-out or recapitalization must deal with United's contentious unions.
The pilots are working under an expired contract, and the machinists contract expires next month.
That gives them enormous leverage, including the threat of a strike to block any buy-out or recapitalization attempt they oppose. 

However, a catalyst like Coniston could seek shareholder support for a sale to a labor-management group at the last price discussed by that group before the board meeting Monday.
The pilots had been working on a buy-out bid between $225 and $240 a share, or $5.09 billion to $5.42 billion. 

One person familiar with UAL said the unsettled labor situation and the uncertain world-wide financial markets contributed to the board's decision to avoid "rushing around selling the company at a bargain price," particularly since it accepted a $300-a-share offer just last month. 

Even some takeover-stock traders said they couldn't quarrel with the board's logic.
But the board's decision prompted many to bail out of the stock yesterday. "We had a lot of people who threw in the towel today," said Earl Ellis, a partner in Benjamin Jacobson & Sons, a specialist in trading UAL stock on the Big Board. 

Another trader noted that many arbitrage firms are afraid to sell their UAL stock at the bottom, but already own so much they can't buy any more. "This deal is like a Roach Motel," he said. "They check in, but they can't check out." 

But both the traders and the pilots remain interested in some transaction.
So too, according to many reports, is British Airways PLC, despite its public withdrawal from the buy-out. 

The pilots might end up teaming up with their longtime adversaries, the machinists union, in a recapitalization.
The machinists are reviewing proposals they made in the past for recapitalizations that would pay a special shareholder dividend and give employees a minority stake.
The company rejected those past proposals. 

It is unclear, however, if the machinists would support a majority stake, as the pilots want.
A machinist official said that would depend on how much in concessions machinists would have to give in return for the majority stake. 

Some investors whose names were bandied about by traders as potential UAL stock buyers said they weren't buying. "I'm not interested," said Dallas investor Harold Simmons.
A source close to Carl Icahn, a corporate raider who owns Trans World Airlines Inc., said he hasn't owned any UAL stock and isn't buying. 

One person familiar with Texas billionaire Robert Bass said he isn't likely to make any hostile moves.
And a spokesman for Reliance Group Holdings Inc., which had held 7% of UAL before the first buy-out bid but later reduced its holdings below 5%, wouldn't comment. 

Marvin Davis, whose $5.4 billion takeover bid originally put the nation's second-largest airline in play, is limited by a standstill agreement with UAL he signed in September.
The Los Angeles investor can't buy UAL stock, solicit shareholder consents or make a new offer unless he makes a formal offer of $300 a share or UAL accepts an offer below $300. 

However, Mr. Davis could pressure the board by asking that the agreement be waived, or letting it be known that he has financing for an offer at a lower price. 

