.START 

The following issues were recently filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission: 

American Exploration Co., offering of five million common shares, via Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. 

Chemical Waste Management Inc., proposed global offering of 8,500,000 shares of common stock, of which seven million of the shares will be offered in the U.S. and 1,500,000 shares will be offered overseas, via Merrill Lynch Capital Markets (domestic) and Kidder, Peabody & Co. (international). 

Interlake Corp., proposed offering of $200 million of senior subordinated debentures, via Goldman, Sachs & Co. 

InterMedia Capital Corp., Robin Cable Systems L.P. and Brenmor Cable Partners, offering of senior subordinated discount reset debentures, via Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 

John Nuveen & Co., initial offerings of the Nuveen California Performance Plus Municipal Fund Inc. and the Nuveen New York Performance Plus Municipal Fund Inc., via Alex.
Brown & Sons Inc. 

KnowledgeWare Inc., initial offering of three million shares of its common stock, of which 1,657,736 shares will be sold by the company and 1,342,264 will be sold by holders, via Montgomery Securities and Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. 

MGM Grand Inc., proposed offering of six million shares of common stock, via Merrill Lynch. 

Microlog Corp., formerly called Old Dominion Systems Inc., offering of 1.2 million common shares, of which one million will be sold by the company, and the balance by holders, via Hambrecht & Quist and Johnston, Lemon & Co. Scott Paper Co., shelf offering of up to $360 million of debt securities, via Goldman Sachs, Salomon Brothers Inc. and Smith Barney, Harris Upham. 

Sullivan Graphics Inc., offering of $110 million of senior subordinated notes, via Merrill Lynch. 

Sun Sportswear Inc., initial offering of 1.7 million common shares, of which one million shares will be sold by the company, and the balance by a holder, via Salomon Brothers Inc. and Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood Inc. 

Yes Clothing Co., proposed initial offering of 776,470 common shares, of which 600,000 shares will be offered by the company and 176,470 by holders, via Seidler Amdec Securities Inc. 

