.START 

Next to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts's megabillion RJR Nabisco deal, SCI Television is small fry. 

But the troubles of SCI TV are a classic tale of the leveraged buy-out excesses of the 1980s, especially the asset-stripping game. 

SCI TV, which expects to release a plan to restructure $1.3 billion of debt in the next day or so, isn't just another LBO that went bad after piling on debt -- though it did do that.
The cable and TV station company was an LBO of an LBO, a set of assets that were leveraged twice, enabling the blue-chip buy-out king Henry Kravis in 1987 to take more than $1 billion of cash out of the com- pany. 

SCI TV's buy-out was an ace in the hole for Mr. Kravis and for investors in KKR partnerships.
But it has left holders of SCI TV's junk bonds holding the bag, including some heavyweights that KKR might need to finance future deals, such as Kemper Financial Services, First Executive, Columbia Savings & Loan and Prudential Insurance Co. of America. 

Some junk-holders are said to be considering legal action against KKR or moves to force SCI TV into bankruptcy court.
And KKR's majority partner in SCI TV's buy-out, Nashville, Tenn., entrepreneur George Gillett, also is said to be very unhappy. 

SCI TV's six stations once were part of Storer Communications.
KKR loaded up the cable and television company with debt in an 1985 buy-out, then later sold Storer's cable operations at a fat profit. 

In 1987, KKR for the second time piled debt onto Storer's TV stations, selling them for $1.3 billion to a new entity that was 45%-owned by KKR and 55%-owned by Gillett Corp., which now operates the SCI TV stations.
In this second LBO, KKR with one hand took more than $1 billion of cash out of the TV company's assets and moved it into the Storer cable operations, making them more valuable in a 1988 sale. (Storer also took $125 million of junior SCI TV bonds as partial payment for the TV assets.) 

With the other hand, KKR put back into SCI TV less than 10% of the cash it had taken out, buying SCI TV common and preferred shares. 

So, while KKR today has an estimated $250 million sunk in now-shaky SCI TV, including equity and debt, the LBO firm still is $1 billion ahead on the SCI TV buy-out after taking cash up front.
On Storer as a whole, KKR racked up compound annual returns of 60% in the three years it owned Storer. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Gillett risks losing his entire equity investment of about $100 million in SCI TV if the company can't be restructured.
Overall, Mr. Gillett's holding company, Gillett Holdings, is heavily indebted and, except for its Vail Mountain resorts, isn't doing very well. 

With the TV business falling on hard times in recent years, analysts say that if SCI TV had to be liquidated today, it might fetch 30% less than in the 1987 buy-out, wiping out most of the company's junk-holders and its stockholders.
Meanwhile, SCI TV can barely pay its cash interest bill, and to stay out of bankruptcy court it must soon reschedule a lot of bank loans and junk bonds that have fallen due. 

SCI TV's grace period for paying its bills is due to expire Nov. 16.
It now is quietly circulating among creditors a preliminary plan to restructure debt.
Negotiations "have started con- structively, but that's not to say we like this particular offer," says Wilbur Ross of Rothschild Inc., adviser to SCI TV junk-holders. 

No major player in the SCI TV deal will talk publicly.
But it's understood that Mr. Kravis is disappointed that Mr. Gillett didn't manage to boost SCI TV's operating profit after the buy-out.
Mr. Kravis apparently thinks SCI TV can survive if lenders extend its debt payments until TV stations rise in value again, allowing SCI TV to sell assets to pay debt.
Mr. Gillett is said to be proud of his operating record; he has lifted some stations' ratings and turned around a Detroit station. 

As for junk-holders, they're discovering it can be a mistake to take the other side of a trade by KKR.
The bonds of SCI TV now are being quoted at prices ranging from only five cents to about 60 cents on the dollar, according to R.D. Smith & Co. in New York, which trades distressed securities. 

People who have seen SCI TV's restructuring plan say it offers concessions by KKR and Gillett Corp.
They would both give part of their combined $50 million in common equity in SCI TV to holders of SCI TV's $488 million of junk bonds, as a carrot to persuade them to accept new bonds that might reduce the value of their claims on the company. 

But some militant SCI TV junk-holders say that's not enough.
They contend that SCI TV's equity now is worthless.
They add that it isn't costing KKR anything to give up equity because of its big up-front cash profit on the buy-out, which they think contributed to SCI TV's current problems.
Kemper, the biggest holder of senior SCI TV bonds, has refused to join the bond-holders committee and is said to be reviewing its legal options. 

To protect their claims, some junk-holders want KKR and perhaps Mr. Gillett to invest new money in SCI TV, perhaps $50 million or more.
One investment banker who isn't involved in the deal says SCI TV needs at least $50 million of new equity to survive. 

Junk-holders say they have a stick to beat KKR with: "The threat of bankruptcy is a legitimate tool" to extract money from KKR, says one big SCI TV holder.
This could be the first major bankruptcy-law proceeding for KKR, he adds.
A big bankruptcy-court case might tarnish KKR's name, and provide new fuel for critics of LBOs in Washington and elsewhere.
But others say junk-holders have nothing to gain by putting SCI TV into bankruptcy-law proceedings. 

While KKR doesn't control SCI TVwhich is unusual for a KKR investment -- it clearly has much deeper pockets than Mr. Gillett.
Bankruptcy specialists say Mr. Kravis set a precedent for putting new money in sour LBOs recently when KKR restructured foundering Seaman Furniture, doubling KKR's equity stake. 

But with Seaman, KKR was only trying to salvage its original investment, says bankruptcy investor James Rubin of Sass Lamle Rubin in New York.
By contrast, KKR probably has already made all the money it can on SCI TV.
And people who know Mr. Kravis say he isn't in a hurry to pour more money into SCI TV. 

