.START 

Magazine publishers are facing spiraling costs and a glut of new titles.
But even a raft of recent failures isn't stopping them from launching new publications. 

At the American Magazine Conference here, publishers are plenty worried about the industry's woes.
But they are also talking about new magazines.
For example, Toronto-based Telemedia Inc. will publish Eating Well, a new food and health magazine due out next summer.
New York-based Hearst Corp. this fall plans to publish its first issue of 9 Months, a magazine for expectant mothers, and has already launched American Home.
And Time Warner Inc. is developing a spinoff of Time magazine aimed at kids, on the heels of its successful Sports Illustrated for Kids. 

Over the past four years, the number of consumer magazines has increased by an average of 80 magazines annually, according to Donald Kummerfeld, president of the Magazine Publishers of America. "This is an impressive show of faith in the future of the magazine industry," said Mr. Kummerfeld. "Entrepreneurs don't rush to get into a stagnant or declining industry." 

And despite the recent tough advertising climate, industry figures released at the meeting here indicate things may be turning around.
For the first nine months, advertising pages in consumer magazines tracked by the Publishers Information Bureau increased 4% from the same period last year, to 125,849 pages.
Total magazine ad revenue for the same period increased 12% to $4.6 billion.
Though for some magazines categories a tough advertising climate persists, the industry in general is doing well compared with the newspaper industry. 

Though some magazines are thriving, the magazine publishing industry remains a risky business.
Within the same nine months, News Corp. closed down In Fashion, a once-promising young woman's fashion magazine, Drake Publications Inc. has folded the long-troubled Venture magazine, and Lang Communications has announced Ms. magazine, after 17 years, will no longer carry advertising as of January.
Lang is cutting costs and will attempt to operate the magazine with only subscription revenue. 

Meanwhile, American Health Partners, publisher of American Health magazine, is deep in debt, and Owen Lipstein, founder and managing partner, is being forced to sell the magazine to Reader's Digest Association Inc. Mr. Lipstein's absence from the meeting here raised speculation that the sale is in trouble.
Mr. Lipstein said in a telephone interview from New York that the sale was proceeding as planned. "The magazine is strong.
It's simply the right time to do what we are doing," Mr. Lipstein said. 

"Magazines can no longer be considered institutions," said James Autry, president of Meredith Corp. 's magazine group. "Publishers will find that some magazines have served their purpose and should die," he added. "Magazines could, like other brands, find that they have only a limited life." 

There are also indications that the number of magazine entrepreneurs, traditionally depended upon to break new ground with potentially risky start-ups, are dwindling.
More than ever, independent magazines and small publishing groups are being gobbled up by larger publishing groups, such as American Express Publishing Corp., a unit of American Express Co., and Conde Nast Publications Inc., a unit of Advance Publications Inc., which are consolidating in order to gain leverage with advertisers. 

Some entrepreneurs are still active, though.
Gerry Ritterman, president of New York-based Network Publishing Corp., earlier this year sold his Soap Opera Digest magazine to Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. Mr. Ritterman said that in the next six months he will take $50 million from the Soap Opera Digest sale to acquire new magazines.
He would not reveal which magazines he is considering. 

"The magazines I am looking for are underdeveloped," said Mr. Ritterman. "They could be old or new, but they are magazines whose editorial quality needs to be improved.
They will be the next hot magazines." 

