.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

FRANKLIN NATIONAL BANK DIED at 3 p.m. EDT, Oct. 8, 1974, and was promptly resurrected under new owners to shore up confidence in other banks during a recession. 

Arthur Burns, Federal Reserve Board chairman, said the government's "luck" in keeping the bank open -- despite being the then-biggest U.S. bank failure -- prevented "shock waves around the country and around the world." Federal officials who had been probing the bank for months arranged a merger with European-American Bank & Trust, owned by six foreign banks, to avert the closedown.
And federal insurance protected the bank's 631,163 depositors. 

The crisis had peaked on May 10, 1974, when the bank disclosed "severe" foreign-exchange losses due to "unauthorized" trading.
Massive withdrawals followed and there was a brief rescue attempt, with political undertones, including $1.77 billion in Federal Reserve loans. 

Within six years many figures were convicted for their illegal abuse of Franklin funds.
In June 1980, Michele Sindona -- an Italian financier who in July 1972 had bought a 22% block of Franklin's stock from Loews Corp., headed by Laurence A. Tisch -- was sentenced to 25 years in prison after being convicted of fraud and perjury.
Included was the charge that Sindona siphoned $45 million of Franklin funds for his other ventures. (Sindona in 1979 faked his "kidnapping" for 2 1/2 months to delay his trial.) 

During 1976 to 1979, other former Franklin officials either pleaded guilty to or were found guilty of violations including phony transactions to hide the bank's losses. 

Sindona, the onetime Vatican financial adviser with reported links to the Mafia, died on March 22, 1986, at age 65, reportedly after drinking cyanide-laced coffee in an Italian prison.
It happened four days after he was sentenced to life in prison for ordering a 1979 murder.
Italian magistrates labeled his death a suicide. 

