.START 

The management turnover at Reebok International Ltd. continued with the resignation of company president C. Joseph LaBonte, who joined Reebok just two years ago. 

Mr. LaBonte's departure follows by two months the resignation of Mark Goldston as senior vice president and chief marketing officer after only 11 months at Reebok. 

The resignations by the two executives, considered hard-charging and abrasive by Reebok insiders, reflect a difference in style with Paul Fireman, chairman and chief executive, according to several former executives.
The two executives are among a number of outsiders recruited by Reebok in the past few years to help it make the transition from a small start-up company to a marketing giant with sales last year of $1.79 billion. 

The changes come as Reebok, which grew rapidly in the mid-1980s but has seen its sales flatten of late, is seeking to regain momentum in the athletic-shoe business against rivals Nike Inc. and L.A. Gear Inc. 

The departures, said Alice Ruth, an analyst at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco, should enable the company to focus on business issues instead of management differences. "I think it's more an issue of style.
I would view it as a net positive.
The company can go about its business.
They're in the midst of a turnaround," she noted. 

Earnings have rebounded in 1989 after a 20% decline last year. 

A former executive agreed that the departures don't reflect major problems, adding: "If you see any company that grows as fast as Reebok did, it is going to have people coming and going." 

Reebok said Mr. LaBonte will resume the presidency of Vantage Group Inc., a California-based venture capital firm that he founded in 1983.
Before that he was president and chief operating officer of Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp. Reebok added that Mr. Fireman will assume the title of president. 

A spokesman said that neither Mr. Fireman nor Mr. LaBonte would be available for comment. "We will not be commenting beyond the news release," the spokesman said. 

Mr. Goldston, who had been president of Faberge Inc. 's Faberge U.S.A. division before joining Reebok in September 1988, left in August to pursue other interests. 

