.START 

McDonald's Corp. said third-quarter earnings rose 14% on a hefty sales gain, but domestic franchisees apparently didn't partake of the improvement. 

The world's largest fast-food chain said net income rose to $217.9 million, or 59 cents a share, from $191.3 million, or 51 cents a share, a year ago.
In the latest period, the company had an average of 370.8 million shares, 5.6 million shares below last year's level. 

Revenue rose 12% to $1.63 billion from $1.46 billion.
Systemwide sales, which include sales at franchisee as well as company-owned stores, totaled $4.59 billion compared with $4.2 billion. 

But sales for U.S. franchisees were flat at best on a per-store basis despite weak 1988 figures.
Compared with the first nine months of last year, average franchisee store sales this year were down nearly $3,200, reflecting a fierce discounting war among fast-food chains.
Since McDonald's menu prices rose this year, the actual decline may have been more. 

McDonald's closed at $31.375, up $1, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday. 

While franchisees were having a tough time holding sales, McDonald's company-operated stores posted hefty gains for the nine months, with sales per company-operated unit rising $20,000.
One analyst noted that the company often has better store locations than do its franchisees, thus aiding promotional efforts. 

On average in the latest nine months, company-operated units in the U.S. had $90,552 more in sales than did franchised outlets.
There are more than three times as many franchised domestic outlets as there are company stores. 

Profit margins at U.S. company-owned stores in the quarter were up nearly 1%, which the company attributed in part to lower food costs.
Prudential-Bache Securities analyst Leslie Steppel said reduced labor costs helped boost margins, although she doubted "that kind of performance is sustainable." Calling sales "still relatively soft," Ms. Steppel believes that in real terms, U.S. sales slipped 3 1/2% to 4% at company-operated stores in the quarter. 

Apparently acknowledging weaker U.S. sales systemwide, McDonald's vowed "to use our size and muscle to do all that is necessary to build the brand." 

Overseas, both franchisees and the company performed substantially better than a year ago.
Third-quarter sales in Europe were exceptionally strong, boosted by promotional programs and new products -- although weaker foreign currencies reduced the company's earnings.
McDonald's said that systemwide sales would have been $115 million greater had 1988 exchange rates remained in effect. 

"Going into the fourth quarter the sales comparison will be more difficult," predicted restaurant analyst Howard Hansen of Kidder, Peabody & Co. 

Reflecting better growth prospects abroad, McDonald's noted that as of Sept. 30 more stores were under construction overseas than a year ago, while the opposite was true for domestic expansion.
At the end of the third quarter McDonald's had 10,873 units operating world-wide. 

In the nine months, earnings rose 12% to $555.6 million, or $1.49 a share, from $494.4 million, or $1.31 a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 11% to $4.56 billion from $4.12 billion. 

