.START 

Euro Disneyland shares made a debut like Snow White yesterday while most of the London stock market looked like it had eaten the Evil Queen's poisoned apple. 

In its first day of when-issued trading here, Euro Disney soared like Dumbo to close at 814 pence ($13.05), up 15% from its 707-pence offering price.
The overall London market, following Wall Street's early nosedive, took a late beating.
The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-Share Index plummeted 40.4 points to close at 2149.3. 

Traders credited Euro Disney's share performance to the tremendous hyping of the project that the shares are destined to help finance: Walt Disney Co. 's 4,800-acre theme park 20 miles east of Paris.
The park is slated to open in 1992. 

"The issue was very well-received -- Disney is such a well-known, you can say world-wide, name," said Vernon Dempsey, head trader of European equities at Kleinwort Benson Ltd., which is making a market in the issue. 

Mr. Dempsey estimated that the issue's London debut was accompanied by "very, very heavy turnover -- between five million and six million shares." Most of the buying was institutional, he added. 

Official trading in the shares will start in London, Paris and Brussels on Nov. 6, when the French-franc denominated offering, valued at the equivalent of nearly $1 billion, comes to market in the European Community.
U.S. investors will be permitted to buy the shares from EC investors 90 days later. 

Because of the interest connected with the issue, the London exchange took the unusual step of letting traders establish an officially sanctioned when-issued market. 

A volatile, unofficial "gray" market in the shares has been operating in Paris for about two weeks.
In contrast to the London performance, Euro Disney there closed down three francs yesterday, at 79 1/2 francs ($12.66) bid, but still about 10% over the 72-franc offering price. 

"A lot of people are getting hurt on this wicked whipsawing," cautioned Alistair Cuddeford, a London-based Salomon Brothers International Ltd. trader who makes a market in franc-denominated Euro Disney shares. "There should be no great rush for investors to buy this.
A lot of big European banks, mostly French, and Swiss arb accounts have been buying the stock just to flip it" for a quick profit, he said. 

