.START 

The tougher new regulations under the savings-and-loan bailout law are accelerating the thrift industry's shrinking act. 

Largely to meet tougher new capital requirements, thrifts reduced their assets $13.4 billion in August, by selling such assets as mortgage-backed securities and loans. 

Industry assets as of Aug. 31 were $1.31 trillion, the lowest since August 1988. 

As thrifts sell assets to improve their capital-to-asset ratio, as required under the new law passed in August, they must also reduce liabilities, such as deposits.
As interest rates paid depositors were lowered, thrift withdrawals exceeded deposits by $5.1 billion, not including interest credited to accounts. 

It was the third consecutive month in which thrifts shed assets to increase the size of their capital in relation to their assets, the Office of Thrift Supervision said.
The asset shrinkage was particularly concentrated in several large California institutions. 

"The downsizing of the thrift industry is well under way," said Bert Ely, an industry consultant in Alexandria, Va. "This suggests the bailout law is having a more dramatic effect than anyone would have imagined so soon." 

James Barth, an economist with the Office of Thrift Supervision, also attributed some of the outflow to seasonal factors. "August is a month when people are paying school tuition," he said. "That and adjustment to the new law were the biggest factors in the industry." 

Not including thrifts under government conservatorship, S&Ls reduced their assets by $10.1 billion from the previous month, and deposit outflows totaled $3.9 billion. 

For the 264 insolvent thrifts under government management at the end of August, assets declined by $3.3 billion and withdrawals exceeded deposits by $1.2 billion. 

Thrifts raised capital mostly by selling mortgages and mortgage-backed securities, which were reduced by $7.8 billion in August from the prior month.
As of Aug. 31, thrifts held $185 billion in mortgage-backed securities. 

The deposit numbers for August marked a swing back to huge outflows after a July net deposit inflow of $54 million -- the only net inflow in more than a year.
Deposits aren't expected to exceed withdrawals in the foreseeable future, as the industry continues to shrink. 

"I think we are going to see deposit shrinkage continue, unless we see big changes in rates," Mr. Ely said. 

For the first eight months of 1989, thrifts' withdrawals exceeded deposits by $44.5 billion.
For the prior year, deposits exceeded withdrawals by $8.8 billion. 

