.START 

Genetic Defect Spotted 

In 3-Day-Old Embryo 

RESEARCHERS diagnosed a genetic defect in a three-day-old mouse embryo in an experiment directly applicable to humans. 

Prenatal diagnosis of genetic defects as early as the sixth week of pregnancy is increasingly common today.
But the mouse experiment at a Medical Research Council laboratory in London shows genetic defects can be detected three days after conception using a new American-developed gene-copying technique. 

The experiment, applicable to many genetic disorders, involved beta-thalassemia, a severe blood anemia resulting from a missing hemoglobin gene.
It's an inherited human disorder that's been duplicated in mice.
In the experiment, mice with the defective gene were mated.
Three days later, before the new embryo had become implanted in the uterus, it was washed out of the mother mouse.
The embryo had progressed only to a clump of eight identical cells.
One cell was teased out, and its DNA extracted. 

Using the new technique developed by Cetus Corp., called the polymerase chain reaction, the scientists rapidly made millions of copies of the section of DNA that ordinarily contains the hemoglobin gene, providing enough copies to test.
A genetic probe showed the hemoglobin gene was missing, the researchers report in the medical journal Lancet. 

In the report, two molecular biologists suggest such embryo diagnosis can be used by couples at high risk of passing a genetic defect to a child. 

For example, infertile couples who have the woman's eggs fertilized in the test tube usually have several eggs fertilized at a time.
When the fertilized cells divide to eight cells, a single cell from each embryo can be tested for genetic defects.
A healthy embryo can be picked for implantation and defective ones discarded. 

Or in other couples, the embryo could be temporarily taken out and tested three days after conception and returned if healthy, or discarded if not. 

Yeast Adapted to Make 

Gene-Spliced Drugs 

AN OIL COMPANY finds a sideline in the microscopic world of yeast. 

In the early 1970s, when the "world food crisis" was a major worry, Phillips Petroleum Co., like several other big companies, began developing "single-cell protein," edible protein made by microbes feeding on non-edible materials.
Phillips found and improved a yeast, "Pichia pastoris," which made protein from natural gas-derived alcohol.
It also could convert glucose from farm wastes into edible protein.
Single-cell protein never panned out, and most companies abandoned such research. 

But Phillips persisted, calling in scientists from the Salk Institute.
They've now adapted the yeast to making genetically engineered drugs.
Like the bacteria used by genetic engineers, the yeast can take in human genes and churn out human proteins for medical use.
But the yeast genetic apparatus is more like that of animals than the bacterial genetic apparatus.
Thus, the proteins from the yeast are molecularly more like human proteins than those from bacteria. 

The oil company claims its yeast system also is better than bacteria at high-volume production of genetically engineered drugs.
Chiron Corp., an Emeryville, Calif., biotechnology firm, is seeing if the Phillips yeast can be used to make its genetically engineered human proteins. 

Peeking Inside Arteries 

From Outside the Body 

VISUALIZING BLOOD vessels without poking catheters into the body may come out of research at AT&T Bell Laboratories. 

Strokes, heart attacks, leg pains (intermittent claudication) and other problems stem from clogging of the arteries by cholesterol-rich deposits.
At present, doctors can see how badly an artery is clogged only by inserting a thin catheter into the artery and injecting a fluid that makes the arteries visible on X-rays. 

A non-invasive method is being researched by biophysicist Lynn Jelinski at the AT&T unit.
It relies on the fact that certain atoms give off detectable signals when subjected to an intense magnetic field.
It's the same phenomenon used in the new MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scanners being used in hospitals in place of X-ray scans. 

In the Bell Labs experiments, an MRI-type of machine, synchronized with the heartbeat via an electrocardiogram, rapidly flashes a magnetic field on and off as blood passes a certain point in a vessel.
The rapidly flashing return signals from excited hydrogen atoms in the blood give a "stop-motion" movie of the blood-filled vessel, (like the "stop-motion" seen in disco dancers when a strobe light is flashing). 

The scientists have experimented on the tiny neck arteries of rats.
They've been able to measure the minuscule movements of the artery wall as the beating heart raises and lowers the pressure of the flowing blood, a first for such tiny blood vessels, they report in Nature, a scientific journal.
They now are experimenting with measuring blood flow.
The ultimate hope is that the technique could identify diseased vessels. 

Odds and Ends 

TESTS ON 2,800-year-old mummies from Chile indicate ancient wood fires didn't produce dioxins or dibenzofurans, contradicting a theory the two pollutants today are coming from wood burning, General Electric Co. reports in Environmental Science & Technology magazine. . . . Almost 40% of schizophrenic men have an impaired sense of smell vs. fewer than 10% of schizophrenic women, reports the American Journal of Psychiatry. 

