.START 

Why can't we teach our children to read, write and reckon?
It's not that we don't know how to, because we do.
It's that we don't want to.
And the reason we don't want to is that effective education would require us to relinquish some cherished metaphysical beliefs about human nature in general and the human nature of young people in particular, as well as to violate some cherished vested interests.
These beliefs so dominate our educational establishment, our media, our politicians, and even our parents that it seems almost blasphemous to challenge them. 

Here is an example.
If I were to ask a sample of American parents, "Do you wish the elementary schools to encourage creativity in your children?" the near-unanimous answer would be, "Yes, of course." But what do we mean, specifically, by "creativity"?
No one can say.
In practice, it ends up being equated with a "self-expression" that encourages the youngsters' "self-esteem." The result is a generation of young people whose ignorance and intellectual incompetence is matched only by their good opinion of themselves. 

The whole notion of "creativity" in education was (and is) part and parcel of a romantic rebellion against disciplined instruction, which was (and is) regarded as "authoritarian," a repression and frustration of the latent talents and the wonderful, if as yet undefined, potentialities inherent in the souls of all our children.
It is not surprising that parents find this romantic extravagance so attractive. 

Fortunately, these same parents do want their children to get a decent education as traditionally understood, and they have enough common sense to know what that demands.
Their commitment to "creativity" cannot survive adolescent illiteracy.
American education's future will be determined by the degree to which we -- all of us -- allow this common sense to prevail over the illusions that we also share. 

The education establishment will fight against common sense every inch of the way.
The reasons are complex, but one simple reason ought not to be underestimated. "Progressive education" (as it was once called) is far more interesting and agreeable to teachers than is disciplined instruction. 

It is nice for teachers to think they are engaged in "personality development" and even nicer to minimize those irksome tests with often disappointing results.
It also provides teachers with a superior self-definition as a "profession," since they will have passed courses in educational psychology and educational philosophy.
I myself took such courses in college, thinking I might end up a schoolteacher.
They could all fairly be described as "pap" courses. 

But it is unfair to dump on teachers, as distinct from the educational establishment.
I know many schoolteachers and, on the whole, they are seriously committed to conscientious teaching.
They may not be among the "best and brightest" of their generation -- there are very few such people, by definition.
But they need not be to do their jobs well.
Yes, we all can remember one or two truly inspiring teachers from our school days.
But our education proceeded at the hands of those others, who were merely competent and conscientious.
In this sense, a teacher can be compared to one's family doctor.
If he were brilliant, he probably would not be a family doctor in the first place.
If he is competent and conscientious, he serves us well. 

Our teachers are not an important factor in our educational crisis.
Whether they are or are not underpaid is a problem of equity; it is not an educational problem.
It is silly libel on our teachers to think they would educate our children better if only they got a few thousand dollars a year more.
It is the kind of libel the teachers' unions don't mind spreading, for their own narrow purposes.
It is also the kind of libel politicians find useful, since it helps them strike a friendly posture on behalf of an important constituency.
But there is not one shred of evidence that, other things being equal, salary differentials result in educational differentials.
If there were such evidence, you can be sure you would have heard of it. 

If we wish to be serious about American education, we know exactly what to do -- and, just as important, what not to do.
There are many successful schools scattered throughout this nation, some of them in the poorest of ghettos, and they are all sending us the same message.
Conversely, there are the majority of unsuccessful schools, and we know which efforts at educational reform are doomed beforehand.
We really do know all we need to know, if only we could assimilate this knowledge into our thinking. 

In this respect, it would be helpful if our political leaders were mute, rather than eloquently "concerned." They are inevitably inclined to echo the conventional pap, since this is the least controversial option that is open to them.
Thus at the recent governors' conference on education, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas announced that "this country needs a comprehensive child-development policy for children under five." A comprehensive development policy for governors over 30 would seem to be a more pressing need.
What Gov. Clinton is advocating, in effect, is extending the educational system down to the pre-kindergarten years.
Whether desirable or not, this is a child-care program, not an educational program.
We know that very early exposure to schooling improves performance in the first grade, but afterward the difference is quickly washed away. 

Let us sum up what we do know about education and about those education reforms that do work and don't work: -- "Parental involvement" is a bad idea.
Parents are too likely to blame schools for the educational limitations of their children.
Parents should be involved with their children's education at home, not in school.
They should see to it that their kids don't play truant; they should make certain that the children spend enough time doing homework; they should scrutinize the report card.
If parents are dissatisfied with a school, they should have the option of switching to another. 

-- "Community involvement" is an even worse idea.
Here, the experience of New York City is decisive.
Locally elected school boards, especially in our larger cities, become the prey of ambitious, generally corrupt, and invariably demagogic local politicians or would-be politicians.
New York is in the process of trying to disengage itself from a 20-year-old commitment to this system of school governance, even as Chicago and other cities are moving to institute it. 

-- In most states, increasing expenditures on education, in our current circumstances, will probably make things worse, not better.
The reason is simple: Education takes place in the classroom, where the influence of money is minimal. 

Decades of educational research tell us unequivocally that even smaller classes have zero effect on the academic performance of the pupils -- though they may sometimes be desirable for other reasons.
The new money flows into the already top-heavy administrative structure, which busies itself piling more and more paper work on the teachers.
There is neither mystery nor paradox in the fact that as educational expenditures (in real terms) have increased sharply in the past quarter-of-a-century -- we now spend more per pupil than any other country in the world -- educational performance has declined.
That is the way the system works. 

-- Students should move up the educational ladder as their academic potential allows.
No student should be permitted to be graduated from elementary school without having mastered the 3 R's at the level that prevailed 20 years ago.
This means "tracking," whose main purpose is less to permit the gifted youngsters to flourish (though that is clearly desirable) than to ensure that the less gifted get the necessary grounding for further study or for entering the modern world of work.
The notion that tracking is somehow "undemocratic" is absurd.
The purpose of education is to encourage young men and women to realize their full academic potential.
No one in his right mind actually believes that we all have an equal academic potential. 

-- It is generally desirable to use older textbooks -- many of them, alas, out of print -- rather than newer ones.
The latter are modish, trendy, often downright silly, and at best insubstantial.
They are based on dubious psychological and sociological theories rather than on educational experience.
One of the reasons American students do so poorly in math tests, as compared with British, French, German or Japanese students, is the influence of the "New Math" on American textbooks and teaching methods. 

Anyone who wants to appreciate just how bizarre this situation is -- with students who can't add or subtract "learning" the conceptual basis of mathematical theory -- should read the article by Caleb Nelson (himself a recent math major at Harvard) in the November American Spectator. 

-- Most important of all, schools should have principals with a large measure of authority over the faculty, the curriculum, and all matters of student discipline.
Study after study -- the most recent from the Brookings Institution -- tells us that the best schools are those that are free of outside interference and are governed by a powerful head.
With that authority, of course, goes an unambiguous accountability.
Schools that are structured in this way produce students with higher morale and superior academic performance.
This is a fact -- though, in view of all the feathers that are ruffled by this fact, it is not surprising that one hears so little about it. 

Mr. Kristol, an American Enterprise Institute fellow, co-edits The Public Interest and publishes The National Interest. 

