.START 

About 400,000 commuters trying to find their way through the Bay area's quake-torn transportation system wedged cheek-to-jowl into subways, sat in traffic jams on major freeways or waited forlornly for buses yesterday. 

In other words, it was a better-than-average Manhattan commute. 

City officials feared widespread gridlock on the first day that normal business operations were resumed following last Tuesday's earthquake.
The massive temblor, which killed at least 61 people, severed the Bay Bridge, a major artery to the east, and closed most ramps leading to and from Highway 101, the biggest artery to the south.
It will take several weeks to repair the bridge, and several months to repair some of the 101 connections. 

But in spite of a wind-driven rainstorm, gridlock never materialized, mainly because the Bay Area Rapid Transit subway system carried 50% more passengers than normal.
For the first time in memory, it was standing-room only in BART's sleek, modern railcars. 

Moreover, the two main bridges still connecting San Francisco with the East Bay didn't charge tolls, allowing traffic to zip through without stopping.
Officials also suspect that traffic benefited from steps by major employers to get workers to come in at odd hours, or that many workers are still staying at home. 

Many commuters who normally drove across the Bay Bridge, which is shut down for several weeks because of damage to one span, actually may have reached work a bit faster on BART yesterday, provided they could find a parking space at the system's jammed stations.
In the best of times, the Bay Bridge is the worst commute in the region, often experiencing back-ups of 20 to 30 minutes or more. 

Not that getting into town was easy.
Storm flooding caused back-ups on the freeway, and many commuters had to find rides to BART's stations, because parking lots were full before dawn.
Bus schedules were sometimes in disarray, stranding commuters such as Marilyn Sullivan.
Her commute from Petaluma, Calif., normally takes an hour and 15 minutes, via the Golden Gate Bridge, which connects San Francisco with the North Bay area.
Yesterday, she was still waiting at a bus stop after three hours, trying to transfer to a bus going to the financial district. 

"It's worse than I thought," she said. "I don't know where all the buses are." 

But while traffic was heavy early in the commute over the Golden Gate, by 8 a.m. it already had thinned out. "It's one of the smoothest commutes I've ever had," said Charles Catania, an insurance broker on the bus from Mill Valley in Marin County. "It looks like a holiday.
I think a lot of people got scared and stayed home." However, a spokeswoman for BankAmerica Corp. said yesterday's absenteeism at the bank holding company was no greater than on an average day. 

At the San Mateo Bridge, which connects the San Francisco peninsula with the East Bay, police were surprised at the speed with which traffic moved. "Everybody pretty much pitched in and cooperated," said Stan Perez, a sergeant with the California Highway Patrol. 

There were many indications that the new work hours implemented by major corporations played a big role.
The Golden Gate handled as many cars as normally yesterday, but over four hours rather than the usual two-hour crush. 

Bechtel Group Inc., the giant closely held engineering concern, says it has instituted a 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. flextime arrangement, whereby employees may select any eight-hour period during those hours to go to work.
Of Bechtel's 17,500 employees, about 4,000 work in San Francisco -- one-third of them commuting from stricken East Bay. 

Pacific Gas & Electric Co. is offering its 6,000 San Francisco employees a two-tier flextime schedule -- either 6 a.m. to 2 p.m. or 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
The flextime may cut by almost a third the number of PG&E employees working conventional 9-5 hours, a spokesman says.
Some of the utility's employees may opt for a four-day workweek, 10 hours a day, to cut the commute by 20%. 

At Pacific Telesis Group, flextime is left up to individual working groups, because some of the telephone company's employees must be on-site during normal business hours, a spokeswoman says. 

Some individuals went to some lengths on their own to avoid the anticipated gridlock.
One senior vice president at Bechtel said he got up at 3 a.m. to drive into San Francisco from the East Bay. 

But transportation officials worry that such extraordinary measures and cooperation may not last.
Although one transportation official said drivers who didn't use car pools were committing "an anti-social act," about two-thirds of the motorists crossing the Golden Gate were alone, compared with the normal 70% rate.
And some commuters, relieved by the absence of gridlock, were planning to return to their old ways. 

