.START 

Eagle Clothes Inc., which is operating under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, said it reached an agreement with its creditors. 

Under the accord, Albert Roth, chairman and chief executive officer, and Arthur Chase, Sam Beigel, and Louis Polsky will resign as officers and directors of the menswear retailer.
Mr. Roth, who has been on leave from his posts, will be succeeded by Geoffrie D. Lurie of GDL Management Inc., which is Eagle's crisis manager.
Mr. Lurie is currently co-chief executive.
Arnold Levine, acting co-chief executive, will continue as senior vice president and a board member. 

Eagle also said it received a commitment for as much as $8 million in financing from Norfolk Capital Group Inc.
In addition, a Norfolk affiliate, York Capital Inc., will purchase all of the interests of Eagle's secured lenders, which total $11.5 million, and guarantee as much as $8.2 million in payments to Eagle's unsecured creditors.
A committee representing the unsecured creditors agreed to accept 24 cents on the dollar, Eagle said. 

The plan would extend the period under which Eagle has the exclusive right to file a reorganization plan.
It would extinguish all of Eagle's existing capital stock and issue new stock to York as sole holder. 

A bankruptcy court hearing is set for Nov. 3 on these accords. 

In its bankruptcy-law petition, filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, Eagle said its problems began in 1987 and early 1988 when its then-senior lender, Bankers Trust Co., reduced its credit line.
In September 1988, Eagle acquired Biny Clothing Inc., a closely held New York chain operated under the Bonds name.
Eagle's management retired and Biny's management took control of the company. 

At the time, Eagle reached a new credit agreement with Bankers Trust and with Bank Leumi Trust Co. of New York for $8 million, and a new subordinated debt accord with First Century Partners and Biny management for $2 million.
But Eagle said the financing was insufficient and sales during the past fiscal year sagged. 

Under Chapter 11, a company operates under protection from creditors' lawsuits while it works out a plan to pay debts. 

