.START 

Garry Kasparov went to combat Sunday with the world's most advanced chess computer and kicked it around -- symbolically, anyway -- like an old tin can. 

Playing black in the first game, the human champion maneuvered Deep Thought, known for its attacking prowess, into a totally passive position.
Then he unleashed his own, unstoppable, attack.
And in the second game, with Mr. Kasparov advancing ferociously as white, D.T. offered feeble resistance and lost even faster. 

Well, mankind can rest easier for now.
Though almost everybody at the playing site had been looking for the 26-year-old Soviet to beat the Pennsylvania-based computer, he gave the machine a far worse drubbing than many expected.
And when Mr. Kasparov strode into the playing hall, he called the outcome.
As if he were Iron Mike, about to enter the ring with a 98-pound weakling, he declared: "I'll be able to beat any computer for the next five years." 

His strategy against D.T. was based on a thorough study of dozens of its games, he said, including its notorious whippings of the grandmasters Bent Larsen of Denmark and Robert Byrne of the U.S. Mr. Kasparov was underwhelmed. "The computer's mind is too straight, too primitive," lacking the intuition and creativity needed to reach the top, he said. 

The champion apparently was not worried at all about D.T.'s strong points.
Its chief builder, Taiwan-born Feng-hsiung Hsu, nicknamed his brainchild "the Weasel" for its tactical flair at wriggling out of horrible positions.
D.T. also has a prodigious and flawless memory, is utterly fearless, and couldn't be distracted by the sexy nude sculptures spread around the playing hall, in the New York Academy of Art.
In fact, D.T. never left home, Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, but communicated with its human handlers by telephone link.
They conceded that the odds favored Mr. Kasparov, but they put their hope in D.T.'s recently enhanced capacity for examining positions -- up to a million per second, from 720,000. 

But the handlers mistakenly stuck with silicon chips; they needed kryptonite.
This became apparent as game one, a Sicilian Defense by Mr. Kasparov, proceeded.
No human can examine millions of moves, but Mr. Kasparov, using his ineffably powerful brain, consistently found very good ones. 

After eight moves by each side, the board was the same as in a game in which Nigel Short of Great Britain fought the champion to a draw in 1980.
But the computer didn't play Mr. Short's ninth move, a key pawn thrust, and its position deteriorated rapidly.
Instead of castling, a standard measure to safeguard the king, D.T. made a second-rate rook maneuver at move 13; then it put a knight offside on move 16. "Only two classes of minds would think of this -- very weak human players, and computers," said Edmar Mednis, the expert commentator for the match, which was attended by hundreds of chess fans. 

By move 21, D.T. had fallen into a deep positional trap.
It allowed Mr. Kasparov to exchange his dark-squared bishop for one of D.T.'s knights.
Bishops usually are worth slightly more than knights, but in this case Mr. Kasparov was left with a very dangerous knight and D.T.'s surviving bishop was reduced to passivity.
Indeed, it looked more like a pawn, a "tall pawn," as spectators snidely put it. 

Consistently, D.T. was over-optimistic about its chances, which it continually sized up, in numerical form.
When most spectators thought its position hopeless, the computer thought it was only, in effect, one-half of a pawn down.
Such evaluations met with derision, and kept the machine from resigning as soon as humans would have -- prompting more derision. 

While D.T. shuffled its king back and forth in a defensive crouch, Mr. Kasparov maneuvered the knight to a dominant outpost.
He also launched a kingside storm, sacrificing a pawn to denude D.T.'s king.
No amount of weasling could have saved this game for D.T.
A piece down, the computer resigned. 

Now, with the crowd in the analysis room smelling figurative blood, the only question seemed to be how fast Mr. Kasparov could win game two.
With the advantage of playing white (which moves first), Mr. Kasparov followed up cleverly against the computer's defense, a Queen's Gambit Accepted. 

As early as move six, Mr. Kasparov deviated from a well-known sequence of moves, developing a knight instead of making a standard bishop attack against the computer's advanced knight.
This left the computer with a broader range of plausible replies -- and it immediately blundered by moving a queenside pawn, to the neglect of kingside development. 

"In a new position just after the opening, a computer will have serious problems," Mr. Kasparov said later.
In such positions, he explained, "you have to create something new, and the computer isn't able to do that right now." 

After only 11 moves for each side, the computer's position was shaky.
Greedily, it grabbed a pawn, at the cost of facing a brutal attack.
And when a defensive move was called for, D.T. passed up an obvious pawn move and instead exposed its queen to immediate tactical threats.
Mr. Kasparov remarked later that "even a weak club player" would have avoided the queen move. 

Now, after only a dozen moves, spectators were looking for a mating combination.
On a demonstration board, emcee Shelby Lyman showed a quick kill initiated by a knight sacrifice; no spectator refuted this line of play.
Mr. Kasparov's continuation was slower but, in the end, just as deadly.
He won D.T.'s queen for two minor pieces and two pawns -- not enough compensation, in this position, to give the computer much hope. 

In a hopeless position, the computer resigned rather than make its 37th move.
And Mr. Kasparov, to cheers and applause, marched back into the analysis room. "In both games I got exactly what I wanted," he said.
What he had demonstrated, he added, is that there's more to chess than sheer calculation. 

Undeterred, D.T.'s handlers vowed to press on.
Indeed, three of them will be building a successor machine for International Business Machines Corp. Promises Feng-hsiung Hsu: "In three years we'll mount a better challenge." 

Mr. Tannenbaum is a reporter in the Journal's New York bureau. 

