.START 

Remember those bulky, thick-walled refrigerators of 30 years ago?
They, or at least something less efficient than today's thin-walled units, may soon be making a comeback.
That something, whatever it is, could add as much as $100 to the $600 or so consumers now pay for lower-priced refrigerators. 

These and other expensive changes in products ranging from auto air conditioners to foam cushioning to commercial solvents are in prospect because of something called the Montreal Protocol, signed by 24 nations in 1987.
In one of the most sweeping environmental regulatory efforts to date -- involving products with an annual value of $135 billion in the U.S. alone -- the signatories agreed to curtail sharply the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
World-wide production would be cut in half by 1998.
The U.S. Senate liked the treaty so well it ratified it by a vote of 89 to 0.
Not to be outdone, George Bush wants CFCs banished altogether by the year 2000, a goal endorsed at an 80-nation U.N. environmental meeting in Helsinki in the spring. 

That's a lot of banishment, as it turns out.
CFCs are the primary ingredient in a gas, often referred to by the Du Pont trade name Freon, which is compressed to liquid form to serve as the cooling agent in refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment.
Gases containing CFCs are pumped into polyurethane to make the foam used in pillows, upholstery and insulation.
Polyurethane foam is a highly efficient insulator, which accounts for why the walls of refrigerators and freezers can be thinner now than they were back in the days when they were insulated with glass fiber. 

But even though by some estimates it might cost the world as much as $100 billion between now and the year 2000 to convert to other coolants, foaming agents and solvents and to redesign equipment for these less efficient substitutes, the Montreal Protocol's legions of supporters say it is worth it.
They insist that CFCs are damaging the earth's stratospheric ozone layer, which screens out some of the sun's ultraviolet rays.
Hence, as they see it, if something isn't done earthlings will become ever more subject to sunburn and skin cancer. 

Peter Teagan, a specialist in heat transfer, is running a project at Arthur D. Little Inc., of Cambridge, Mass., to find alternative technologies that will allow industry to eliminate CFCs.
In addition to his interest in ozone depletion he has extensively studied the related topic of global warming, a theory that mankind's generation of carbon dioxide through increased combustion of fossil fuels is creating a "greenhouse effect" that will work important climatic changes in the earth's atmosphere over time. 

"I would be the first to admit that there is not a complete consensus in the scientific community on either one of these problems," says Mr. Teagan. "In the kind of literature I read I come across countervailing opinions quite frequently.
But the nature of the problem is such that many others feel it has to be addressed soon, before all the evidence is in.
We can't afford to wait." 

But does it have to be so soon?
Some atmospheric scientists think that even if CFCs were released into the atmosphere at an accelerating rate, the amount of ozone depletion would be only 10% by the middle of the next century.
It's easy to get something comparable by simply moving to a higher altitude in the U.S. 

Moreover, there are questions, particularly among atmospheric scientists who know this subject best, about the ability of anyone to know what in fact is happening to the ozone layer.
It is generally agreed that when CFCs rise from earth to stratosphere, the chlorine in them is capable of interfering with the process through which ultraviolet rays split oxygen molecules and form ozone.
But ozone creation is a very large-scale natural process and the importance of human-generated CFCs in reducing it is largely a matter of conjecture.
The ozone layer is constantly in motion and thus very hard to measure.
What scientists have known since the late 1970s is that there is a hole in the layer over Antarctica that expands or contracts from year to year.
But it is at least worthy of some note that there are very few refrigerators in Antarctica.
Moreover, surely someone has noticed that household refrigerators are closed systems, running for many years without either the CFC gas or the insulation ever escaping. 

Another argument of the environmentalists is that if substitutes are available, why not use them?
Mr. Teagan cites a list of substitutes but none, so far, match the nonflammable, nontoxic CFCs.
Butane and propane can be used as coolants, for example, but are flammable.
Moreover, new lubricants will be needed to protect compressors from the new formulations, which, as with CFCs, are solvents.
Mr. Teagan points out as well that if the equipment designed to get along without CFCs is less efficient than current devices, energy consumption will rise and that will worsen the greenhouse effect.
Folks in the Midwest who just suffered a mid-October snowstorm may wonder where the greenhouse was when they needed it, but let's not be flippant about grave risks. 

As it happens, Arthur D. Little is not at all interested in throwing cold water on ozone depletion and global warming theories.
It is interested in making some money advising industry on how to convert to a world without CFCs.
There is, after all, big money in environmentalism. 

Maybe we should ask why it was that Du Pont so quickly capitulated and issued a statement, giving it wide publicity, that it was withdrawing CFCs.
Freon, introduced in 1930, revolutionized America by making refrigeration and air conditioning practical after all.
One answer is that big companies are growing weary of fighting environmental movements and are trying instead to cash in on them, although they never care to put it quite that way.
Du Pont, as it happens, has a potential substitute for CFCs.
Imperial Chemical Industries of the U.K. also has one, and is building a plant in Louisiana to produce it.
Japanese chemical companies are at work developing their own substitutes and hoping to conquer new markets, of course. 

There are still others who don't mind seeing new crises arise.
Environmental groups would soon go out of business were they not able to send out mailings describing the latest threat and asking for money to fight it.
University professors and consultants with scientific credentials saw a huge market for their services evaporate when price decontrol destroyed the energy crisis and thus the demand for "alternative energy." They needed new crises to generate new grants and contracts. 

In other words, environmentalism has created a whole set of vested interests that fare better when there are many problems than when there are few.
That tends to tilt the public debate toward "solutions" even when some of the most knowledgeable scientists are skeptical about the seriousness of the threats and the insistence of urgency.
There is an element of make-work involved. 

Consumers pay the bill for all this in the price of a refrigerator or an air-conditioned car.
If they were really getting insurance against environmental disaster, the price would be cheap.
But if there is no impending threat, it can get to be very expensive. 

