.START 

Ford Motor Co. 's Merkur, the company's first new car franchise in the U.S. since the Edsel was unveiled in 1957, now will share Edsel's fate. 

Ford said yesterday it will halt imports of the Merkur Scorpio, a $28,000 luxury sedan built by Ford of Europe in West Germany.
The cars are sold under a separate franchise with its own sign in front of Lincoln-Mercury dealers -- as opposed to new models such as Taurus or Escort, which are sold under existing Ford divisions. 

The move to halt imports -- announced 29 years and 11 months to the day after Henry Ford II declared that the Edsel division and its gawky car would be scrapped -- kills the four-year-old Merkur brand in the U.S. market.
It will continue to be sold in the European market. 

Merkur's death isn't nearly as costly to Ford as was the Edsel debacle, because Merkur was a relatively low-budget project with limited sales goals.
Still, Merkur's demise is a setback for Ford at a time when the company's image as the U.S. auto maker with the golden touch is showing signs of strain. 

The No. 2 auto maker's new Thunderbird and Mercury Cougar models haven't met sales expectations in the year since they were introduced, and Ford's trucks are losing ground to their GM rivals.
This fall, Ford introduced only one new product: A restyled version of its hulking Lincoln Town Car luxury model. 

The demise of Merkur (pronounced mare-COOR) comes after a September in which 670 Merkur dealers managed to sell only 93 Scorpios.
Total Merkur sales for the first nine months dropped 46% from a year ago to just 6,320 cars. 

Merkur isn't the only European luxury brand having problems in the U.S.
The Japanese assault on the luxury market is rapidly overshadowing such European makes as Audi and Saab, which at least have clear brand images.
Merkur, as an import on domestic car lots, suffered from the same sort of image confusion that is hobbling sales of imports at General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp. 

Merkur was originally aimed at enticing into Lincoln-Mercury dealerships the kind of young, affluent buyers who wouldn't be caught dead in a Town Car -- a vehicle so bargelike that Ford is staging a press event next month linking the Town Car's launch to the commissioning of a new aircraft carrier in Norfolk, Va. 

But the brand had trouble from the start.
The first Merkur, the XR4Ti, went on sale in early 1985.
The sporty coupe foundered in part because American buyers didn't go for the car's unusual double-wing rear spoiler. 

In May 1987, Ford began importing the Scorpio sedan from West Germany to sell next to a redesigned XR4Ti in showrooms.
Ford officials said they expected the two Merkurs would sell about 15,000 cars a year, and in 1988 they reached that goal, as sales hit 15,261 cars. 

It was downhill from there, however.
One major factor was the decline of the dollar against the mark, which began less than a year after Merkur's 1985 launch.
As the West German currency rose, so did Merkur prices. 

The Merkur cars also suffered from spotty quality, some dealers say. "It was like a comedy of errors," says Martin J. "Hoot" McInerney, a big dealer whose Star Lincoln-Mercury-Merkur operation in Southfield, Mich., sold more XR4Ti's than any other dealership.
But by the third quarter of 1988, Scorpios had a high satisfaction rating in internal Ford studies, a spokesman said. 

Apparently, however, the improvement came too late.
Last fall, Ford announced it would discontinue the XR4Ti in the U.S. at the end of the 1989 model year.
Ford said then it would keep the Scorpio.
This year, Scorpio sales plummeted, and at the current sales pace it would take Ford 242 days to sell off the current Scorpio inventory of about 4,600 cars. 

