.START 

Two major drug companies posted strong third-quarter earnings, in line with profits already reported by industry leaders and analysts' expectations.
But Pfizer Inc., based in New York, reported flat earnings. 

Schering-Plough Corp., based in Madison, N.J., reported a 21% rise in earnings as American Home Products Corp. of New York posted an 11% increase in net. 

American Home Products 

American Home Products said sales and earnings for the third quarter and nine months were at record levels.
Sales for the third quarter increased 6.5% to $1.51 billion from $1.42 billion. 

Sales of health-care products increased 6% in the third quarter, based in part on strong sales of prescription drugs such as Premarin, an estrogen-replacement drug, and sales of the company's infant formula. 

American Home Products said net income benefited from a "lower effective tax rate," reflecting a reduction of foreign tax rates, and additional operations in Puerto Rico.
Net also was aided by a gain on the sale of the company's equity interests in South Africa effective Sept. 1. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, American Home Products closed at $102.25 a share, down 75 cents. 

Pfizer 

Pfizer said third-quarter sales increased 4% to $1.44 billion from $1.38 billion.
The company said net income was flat because of investment in research and development and costs related to launches of several products. 

The company said the dollar's continued strengthening reduced world-wide sales growth by three percentage points. 

Pfizer posted its largest gains in healthcare sales, up 3%, and consumer products, up 23%.
Sales by the specialty chemicals and materials science segments were flat, and sales by the agriculture segment declined 5%. 

In the health-care segment, pharmaceutical sales increased 4% and sales of hospital products increased 1%.
During the quarter, Pfizer received federal approval of Procardia XL, a calcium channel blocker approved for both angina and hypertension, and Monorail Piccolino, used to open obstructed coronary arteries. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Pfizer closed at $67.75 a share, up 75 cents. 

Schering-Plough 

Schering-Plough said sales gained 2.7% to $743.7 million from $724.4 million. 

In the period, the company completed the sale of its European cosmetics businesses, sold a majority interest in its Brazilian affiliate, and announced the reorganization of its over-the-counter drug businesses into a new unit, Schering-Plough Health Care Products.
These actions didn't affect results because the gain on the sale of the European cosmetics businesses was offset by provisions relating to the Brazil divestiture and drug restructuring. 

U.S. pharmaceutical sales rose 15%, led by allergy, asthma and cold products; dermatological products; anti-infectives and anti-cancer products; and cardiovascular products. 

World-wide consumer product sales declined 12%, primarily because of the European cosmetics sale.
Significantly lower sales of `Stay Trim' diet aids also were a factor in the drop.
The Maybelline beauty product line had higher sales following a sluggish first half. 

In Big Board composite trading, Schering-Plough shares fell 75 cents to close at $74.125. 

