.START 

Dell Computer Corp., squeezed by price pressure from its larger competitors and delays in its new product line, said its per-share earnings for fiscal 1990 will be half its previous forecasts. 

Although the personal computer maker said it expects revenue to meet or exceed previous projections of $385 million for the year ending Jan. 28, 1990, earnings are expected to be 25 cents to 35 cents a share, down from previous estimates of 50 cents to 60 cents.
Earnings for fiscal 1989 were $14.4 million, or 80 cents a share, on sales of $257.8 million. 

Results for the third quarter ending Oct. 31, are expected to be released the third week of November, according to Michael Dell, chairman and chief executive officer.
Mr. Dell said he doesn't expect a loss in either the third or fourth quarter, but said third-quarter earnings could be as low as four cents a share.
In the third quarter last year, Dell had net income of $5 million, or 26 cents a share, on sales of $75.2 million. 

Mr. Dell attributed the earnings slide to new product delays, such as a laptop scheduled for September that won't be introduced until early November.
Some delays have been caused by a shortage of micoprocessors -- notably Intel Corp. 's newest chip, the 486 -- but others apparently have been caused by Dell's explosive growth and thinly stretched resources. 

"They've got a lot of different balls in the air at the same time," observes Jim Poyner, a computer securities analyst with Dallas-based William K. Woodruff & Co. Mr. Dell, meanwhile, concedes the company was "definitely too optimistic" in its expectations. 

Product delays, however, have left Dell buffeted by harsher competition in its bread-and-butter line of desktop computers, as powerhouse competitors Compaq Computer Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. price their PCs more aggressively.
The result has been thinner margins, which have been further eroded by an ambitious research and development effort and rapid overseas expansion. 

Analyst James Weil of the Soundview Financial Group believes Dell's response has been to place increased emphasis on product quality, "in an effort to rise above some of that price pressure." But that has been the key to Compaq's success, he adds, whereas Dell carved out its market niche as a direct seller of low-cost but reliable computers -- and it might be too late in the game for a shift in strategy. 

In national over-the-counter trading, Dell closed yesterday at $6 a share, down 87.5 cents. 

