.START 

The Federal Reserve System is the standard object of suggestions for organizational and institutional changes, for two reasons. 

First, its position in the government is anomalous.
It has an unusual kind of independence from elected officials and still has authority over one of the most powerful of government's instruments -- the control of the money supply.
Thus we have a condition that is easily described as undemocratic.
Second, the responsibilities of the Federal Reserve as guardian of the currency, which means as guardian of the stability of the price level, sometimes lead it to take measures that are unpopular.
As former Fed Chairman William McChesney Martin used to say, they would have to take the punch bowl away just as the party is getting interesting. 

So the Federal Reserve is an attractive target for complaint by politicians.
The Fed is easily assigned the blame for unpleasantness, like high interest rates or slow economic growth, while the politicians can escape responsibility by pointing to the Fed's independence. 

This leads to proposals for "reform" of the Fed, which have the common feature of making the Fed more responsive to the administration, to the Congress and to public opinion -- without, however, any assumption of additional responsibility by the politicians.
These proposals include changing the term of the chairman, shortening the terms of the members, eliminating the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks from the decision-making process, putting the Secretary of the Treasury on the Federal Reserve Board, having the Fed audited by an arm of Congress (the General Accounting Office), putting the Fed's expenditures in the budget, and requiring prompt publication of the Fed's minutes.
Some of these ideas are again under consideration in Congress. 

But these proposals do not rest on a view of what the Fed's problem is or, if they do, they rest on an incorrect view.
They would not solve the problem; they would make it worse.
The problem is not that the Fed is too unresponsive to the public interest.
On the contrary, it is too responsive to an incorrect view of the public interest. 

The price level in the U.S. is now about 4 1/4 times as high as it was 30 years ago.
On average, something that cost $100 30 years ago now costs $425.
Or, a wage that was $100 30 years ago would buy only $23.53 worth of stuff today.
On two occasions the inflation rate rose to more than 10% a year.
In each case the ending of this unsustainable inflation caused a severe recession -- the two worst of the postwar period. 

The enormous inflation over the past 30 years was largely due to monetary policy.
At least, it would not have happened without the support of monetary policy that provided for a 10-fold increase in the money supply during the same period.
And that increase in the money supply would not have happened without the consent of the Federal Reserve. 

The basic problem of monetary policy, to which reform of the Fed should be addressed, is to prevent a recurrence of this experience. 

There were two general reasons for the mistaken monetary policy of the past 30 years: 

1.
To some extent the Federal Reserve shared the popular but incorrect view that expansionary monetary policy could yield a net improvement in employment and output. 

2.
Even where the Fed did not share this view it felt the need to accommodate to it.
Despite all the formal provisions for its independence, the Fed seems constantly to feel that if it uses its independence too freely it will lose it. 

The common proposals for reforming the Fed would only make the situation worse, if they had any effect at all.
Putting the Secretary of the Treasury on the Board of Governors, one of the leading proposals today, is an example.
The secretary is the world's biggest borrower of money.
He has a built-in, constant longing for lower interest rates.
Moreover, he is a political agent of a political president, who naturally gives extraordinary weight to the way the economy will perform before the next election, and less to its longer-run health.
These days, the secretary suffers the further disqualification that he is a member of a club of seven finance ministers who meet occasionally to decide what exchange rates should be, which is a diversion from the real business of the Federal Reserve to stabilize the price level. 

How should a reasonable member of the Federal Reserve Board interpret a congressional decision to put the secretary on the board?
Could he plausibly interpret it as encouragement for the Fed to give primary emphasis to stabilizing the price level?
Or would he interpret it as instruction to give more weight to these other objectives that the secretary represents -- low interest rates, short-run economic expansion, and stabilization of exchange rates at internationally managed levels?
The answer seems perfectly clear. 

(True, a succession of Fed chairmen has given color to the notion that the Secretary of the Treasury belongs on the Fed.
By their constant readiness to advise all and sundry about federal budgetary matters the chairmen have encouraged the belief that fiscal policy and monetary policy are ingredients of a common stew, in which case it is natural that the Fed and the Treasury, and probably also the Congress, should be jointly engaged in stirring the pot.
The Fed's case for its own independence would be a little stronger if it were more solicitous of the independence of the rest of the government.) 

The Fed's problem is not that it is too independent, or too unpolitical.
The Fed is responsive to, and cannot help being responsive to, the more overtly political part of the government.
The Fed exercises a power given to it by Congress and the president.
But Congress and the president accept no responsibility for the exercise of the power they have given the Fed. 

Critics of the present arrangement are correct to say that it is undemocratic.
What is undemocratic is the unwillingness of the more political parts of the government to take the responsibility for deciding the basic question of monetary policy, which is what priority should be given to stabilizing the price level.
To leave this decision to an "independent" agency is not only undemocratic.
It also prevents the conduct of a policy that has a long-term rationale, because it leaves the Fed guessing about what are the expectations of its masters, the politicians, who have never had to consider the long-term consequences of monetary policy. 

The greatest contribution Congress could make at this time would be to declare that stabilizing the price level is the primary responsibility of the Federal Reserve System.
Legislation to this effect has been introduced in Congress in this session by Rep. Stephen Neal (D., N.C.).
It is not the kind of thing that is likely to be enacted, however.
Congress would be required to make a hard decision, and Congress would much prefer to leave the hard decision to the Fed and retain its rights of complaint after the fact. 

People will say that the nation and the government have other objectives, in addition to stabilizing the price level, which is true.
But that is not the same as saying that the Federal Reserve has other objectives.
The government has other agencies and instruments for pursuing these other objectives.
But it has only the Fed to pursue price-level stability.
And the Fed has at most very limited ability to contribute to the achievement of other objectives by means other than by stabilizing the price level. 

The two objectives most commonly thought to be legitimate competitors for the attention of the Fed are high employment and rapid real growth.
But the main lesson of economic policy in the past 30 years is that if the Fed compromises with the price-stability objective in the pursuit of these other goals, the result is not high employment and rapid growth but is inflation. 

A former chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, Mr. Stein is an American Enterprise Institute fellow. 

