.START 

Couple Counseling 

Grows to Defuse Stress 

MORE EXECUTIVES and their spouses are seeking counseling as work and family pressures mount.
Some employers initiate referrals, especially if work problems threaten a top manager's job. 

Many couples "are like ships passing in the night," a communications gulf that sparks problems on the job and at home, says psychologist Harry Levinson.
His Levinson Institute in Belmont, Mass., has seen in recent years a doubling in the number of executives and spouses at its weeklong counseling program.
Employers foot the bill, he says, figuring what's good for the couple is good for the company. 

One East Coast manufacturing executive, faced with a job transfer his wife resented, found that counseling helped them both come to grips with the move.
And the vice president of a large Midwestern company realized that an abrasive temperament threatened his career when his wife confided that similar behavior at home harmed their marriage. 

More dual-career couples also are getting help, with men increasingly bringing their working wives for joint counseling. "The level of stress for a woman is often so high, it's the husband who says, 'I'm worried about her, '" says psychologist Marjorie Hansen Shaevitz.
Her Institute for Family and Work Relationships in La Jolla, Calif., has noted a doubling in the number of couples seeking help the past two years. 

"No matter how competent and smart you both are, the relationship almost certainly will erode if you don't have time to talk, to have fun and to be sexual," says Ms. Shaevitz. 

She urges client couples to begin a "detoxification" period, purging social and other nonproductive activities and setting time apart for themselves. "Putting those times on the calendar," she says, "is as important as remembering business appointments." 

Power of Suggestion 

Stronger in Japan 

HERE'S ONE more explanation for why Japan is a tough industrial competitor: Two of three Japanese employees submit suggestions to save money, increase efficiency and boost morale, while only 8% of American workers do. 

And the Japanese make far more suggestions -- 2,472 per 100 eligible employees vs. only 13 per 100 employees in the 

Data for 1987 from the National Association of Suggestion Systems and the Japan Human Relations Association also indicate that Japanese employers adopt four of five suggestions, while their U.S. counterparts accept just one in four. 

In Japan, small suggestions are encouraged.
Each new employee is expected to submit four daily in the first few months on the job.
U.S. companies tend to favor suggestions "that go for the home runs," says Gary Floss, vice president of corporate quality at Control Data Corp. 

That helps explain why American employers grant an average award of $604.72 per suggestion, while Japan's payment is $3.23.
Still, suggestions' net savings per 100 employees is $274,475 in Japan vs. $24,891 in the U.S. 

U.S. companies developing management teams are wrestling with how to handle individual suggestion systems.
Control Data, for one, plays down its employee suggestion program because it favors the team-management focus. 

Merger Fallout: Beware 

Employee Dishonesty 

CORPORATE security directors increasingly worry that merger mania spawns a rise in employee dishonesty. 

A Security magazine survey places the effect of takeovers and buy-outs among the industry's 10 biggest challenges. "If it causes management to take their eye off the ball, inventory shrinkage is going to be affected," says Lewis Shealy, vice president for loss prevention at Marshall Field's, the department store chain. 

A separate study of the extent of employee misconduct linked general job satisfaction to property loss.
Co-author Richard Hollinger cites what happened at one family-owned company absorbed by a foreign giant.
Pilferage climbed dramatically as many angry employees "felt abandoned by the former owners," says the University of Florida sociologist. 

But top management should watch for other tell-tale signs of employee misdeeds, like expense-account fudging and phone misuse.
Security consultant Dennis Dalton of Ventura, Calif., thinks mergers often trigger longer lunch hours and increased absenteeism, conduct which can sap the bottom line more than thefts. 

New management can take several steps to reduce dishonesty.
Most important, experts say, is to show that a company's ethical tone is set at the top.
Mr. Dalton also recommends that the chief executive establish a rumor control center and move swiftly to bolster morale. 

Consultant John Keller of Southlake, Texas, urges that top management adopt a "tough hands-on approach" with very tight controls and monitoring.
And security authority Robert L. Duston favors disciplining all employees who cheat. 

Firms Walk Fine Line 

In Distributing Profits 

ARE CORPORATE profits distributed fairly?
A survey by Sirota, Alper & Pfau, a New York consulting firm, underscores the difficulty for top management in satisfying employees and investors on that score. 

Nearly seven of 10 investors think companies reinvest "too little" of their profits in the business.
And half the employees surveyed think companies dole out too little to them.
But both see a common enemy: About 66% of employees and 73% of investors think senior managers get too big a slice of the profit pie. 

