.START 

H&R Block is one of the great success stories of U.S. business.
Oddly enough, this presents a problem for the stock. 

Some money managers are disenchanted with H&R Block because they suspect the company's glory days are past, or at least passing.
Block's tax-preparation business is mature, they say, and some of its diversifications are facing tough competition. 

It's no secret that Block dominates the mass-market tax-preparation business.
The Street knows all about the predictability of its earnings, which are headed for a ninth consecutive yearly increase.
The company has consistently earned more than a 20% annual return on its net worth while many companies would be happy with 15%. 

But the tax-preparation business simply has no more room to grow, says Mark Cremonie, director of research for Capital Supervisors Inc., a Chicago firm that manages $6.5 billion. "You go to any medium-sized town in the U.S. and you're going to see H&R Block tax services." 

Mr. Cremonie's firm once held about 4.8% of H&R Block.
That was before the 1986 tax "reform" made taxes more complex than ever. "One thing you can bet on," he says, "is that Congress will do stupid things with the Tax Code." But Capital Supervisors sold the last of its H&R Block holdings earlier this year. "They're thrashing around for diversification," he says. "I think a lot of their businesses are just so-so." 

Last week the stock hit an all-time high of 37 1/4 before getting roughed up in the Friday-the-13th minicrash.
It closed yesterday at 34 3/4. 

To be sure, the stock still has a lot of fans. "If you invested $10,000 in the initial public offering in 1962, it would be worth well over $5 million today," says Fredric E. Russell, a Tulsa, Okla., money manager. "I don't know what the risk is {of holding the stock}.
Taxes are not going out of business." 

Many of his peers feel the same way.
The number of big institutions that own H&R Block shares is 207 and growing, according to a midyear tally by CDA Investment Technologies.
Brokerage houses are sweet on H&R Block, too.
Zacks Investment Research counts five brokerage houses that consider the stock a buy, and four that call it a hold.
None dare say to sell it. 

But some money managers are doing just that.
Eugene Sit, president of Sit Investment Associates in Minneapolis, says, "When we bought it, we thought the growth rate was going to accelerate" because of computerized tax filing and instant refunds (the customer gets a refund immediately but pays extra to the tax preparer, which waits for Uncle Sam's check). 

But neither of those developments did much to juice up growth, Mr. Sit says.
He figures Block earnings are now growing at about a 10% annual rate (down from about 14% the past five years) and will grow at an 8%-10% rate in the future. 

That's "not bad," Mr. Sit says, but it sure doesn't justify Block shares being priced at 15 to 16 times estimated earnings for fiscal 1990.
He wants stocks whose price/earnings ratio is less than their growth rate; as he figures it, H&R Block doesn't even come close. 

Two other money managers, in explaining why they have sold large amounts of H&R Block stock this year, spoke on the condition they not be named. 

"The stock was going no place and the earnings were so-so," said one. (In the past two years, the stock almost stalled out.
It was above 33, adjusted for a subsequent split, in 1987, and hasn't gotten much higher since.) 

"There's no more growth in the tax business {except} for increasing prices," the money manager added.
The CompuServe subsidiary (which provides information to home-computer users) is "where the growth is," he said, but its format is "still too complicated." 

CompuServe provides about 20% of both sales and earnings.
The tax business still provides about 70% of earnings, on about 50% of sales.
Personnel Pool (temporary workers, mostly in the health-care area) chips in close to 25% of sales but only about 9% of earnings. 

The shortage of nurses is crimping profit at Personnel Pool, said the second money manager.
He concedes H&R Block is "well-entrenched" and "a great company," but says "it doesn't grow fast enough for us.
We're looking for something that grows faster and sells at a comparable {price-earnings} multiple." 

Thomas M. Bloch, president and chief operating officer, says "I would disagree" that the tax business is mature.
For example, he says, the company is planning to go nationwide with a new service, tested in parts of the country, aimed at taxpayers who want refunds in a hurry. 

Mr. Bloch concedes that a recent diversification attempt fell through. "We're still interested {in diversifying}," he says, "but we'd rather be prudent than make a mistake." He also says CompuServe's earnings continue to grow "20% to 30% a year" in spite of tough competition from giants like Sears and IBM.
And he says Block's other businesses are growing, although less consistently. 

H&R Block 

(NYSE; Symbol:HRB) 

Business: Tax Preparation 

Year ended April 30, 1989: 

Revenue: $899.6 million 

Net loss: $100.2 million; $1.90 a share 

First quarter, July 31, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: Loss of 8 cents vs. loss of 9 cents 

Average daily trading volume: 

145,954 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 52.6 million 

