.START 

Where do Americans put their money?
It depends on when you look. 

In 1900, for instance, less than 8% of assets went into bank deposits.
That rose to nearly 18% during the Depression, and hasn't changed much since.
Pension reserves, on the other hand, made up a relatively small part of household assets until the last decade, when they skyrocketed.
And there has been a drastic decline in the importance of unincorporated business assets -- thanks to industry consolidation and a decline in family farms. 

That's some of what emerges from the following charts, which show how Americans have changed their investment patterns over the past 90 years.
Some results are self-explanatory.
But other figures are surprising. 

Housing, for instance, has remained a fairly steady component of household assets over the past decade -- although common wisdom would have expected an increase. "There is a lot of attention paid to housing as a form of household wealth," says Edward N. Wolff, professor of economics at New York University. "But it hasn't increased much relative to other assets.
It suggests that households accumulate wealth across a broad spectrum of assets.
And housing though it appears in the popular mind as being the major {growing} household asset, isn't." 

In addition, investors' desire to hold stocks -- directly and through mutual funds -- has held surprisingly steady; stocks' importance among assets largely reflects the ups and downs of the stock market, and not a shift in stock-holding preferences. "Stocks have not spread to the general public, despite the fact that the environment is much different," concludes Robert Avery, an economist at Cornell University. "To me it says that despite all the views that we spend too much of our wealth on paper assets, we have ways of holding wealth similar to 100 years ago." 

-- The charts show how househld assets have been distributed over time.
The main components of the various asseet categories: 

Housing: Primary home, but not the land it's on. 

Land and Other Real Estate: Land on which primary home is built, investment property. 

Consumer Durables: Automobiles, appliances, furniture. 

Bank Deposits: Currency, checking-account deposits, small savings and time deposits, certificates of deposits, money-market fund shares. 

Bonds: Excludes bond funds. 

Stocks/Mutual Funds: Stocks and mutual funds other than money-market funds. 

Unincorporated Business: Partnerships and sole proprietorships, professional corporations. 

Pension Reserves: Holdings by pension funds. 

