.START 

Okay, now you can pick up that phone.
But don't do anything rash. 

After last Friday's stock-market plunge, investment professionals cautioned people to resist the urge to call their brokers and sell stocks.
Not selling into a panic turned out to be very good advice: Despite the market's volatility, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has surged 114 points in the past four days. 

Now, with a semblance of normalcy returning, some advisers say it's time for investors to take a hard, cold look at the stocks they own and consider some careful pruning. 

"The market is sending nervous signals," says Peter J. Canelo, chief market strategist for Bear, Stearns & Co., and it's "unwise" to be overcommitted to stocks.
Alan Weston, president of Weston Capital Management, a Los Angeles money-management firm, adds that in periods of uncertainty like today, "it's a good time to cut out the dead branches of your portfolio." 

Not everybody agrees that it's time to trim. "We aren't inclined to prune stock portfolios now," says Steven G. Einhorn, chairman of the investment policy committee of Goldman, Sachs & Co. "Investors should stay with their stocks.
We expect a choppy and sloppy market for a short period, but we don't think it will be ugly.
The downside is limited." 

And even those who say some selective selling may be in order stress that individuals need to be in the stock market to achieve their long-term investment objectives and to help balance their other assets. 

Any selling, they say, should be well thought-out, and executed gradually, during market rallies.
They offer these suggestions: 

GET RID OF THE DOGS. "Sell stocks that aren't doing well now, and that don't have good earnings prospects," says Alfred Goldman, technical analyst at St. Louis-based A.G. Edwards & Sons. "Most people do just the opposite: They sell their winners and keep their losers." Which types of stocks are most likely to qualify?
Technology stocks, says Mr. Goldman. 

WATCH FOR EARNINGS DISAPPOINTMENTS.
A company doesn't have to post a loss to be a candidate for sale, says Charles I. Clough Jr., chief market strategist at Merrill Lynch & Co.
If earnings don't live up to analysts' expectations, he says, that's enough to dump the stock. 

John Markese, director of research for the American Association of Individual Investors, raises a cautionary note. "Substituting a rule of thumb for your own judgment" can be a mistake, he says.
An earnings disappointment may reflect a situation that's short-term. 

But Mr. Clough says, "The risk is that earnings disappointments will continue." The economy is decelerating after six good years, and "right now it's better to shoot first and ask questions later." Which types of stocks currently have the greatest earnings risks?
Computer companies; commodity cyclical stocks, like autos; and retailing stocks, he says. 

BEWARE OF HEAVY DEBT.
The companies apt to run into earnings problems soonest are the ones with heavy debt loads, says Larry Biehl, partner in the San Mateo, Calif., money-management firm of Bailard, Biehl & Kaiser.
Mr. Canelo of Bear Stearns agrees: "If we do have an economic slowdown," he says, "companies with high debt ratios will be dumped en masse." The best course for individual investors is to sell these stocks now, the two advisers say. 

SELL `WHISPER' STOCKS. UAL Corp. 's difficulty in obtaining bank financing for its leveraged buy-out and its resulting price plunge is a tip-off to what's going to happen to "takeover stocks," says Mr. Canelo.
Takeover activity will slow down as more and more banks tighten their lending requirements, he says. "There'll be fewer and fewer deals." 

Moreover, many financial advisers say individuals should be in the stock market as long-term investors, not as traders trying to catch the next hot stock.
In general, they say, avoid takeover stocks. 

COMPARE P/E RATIOS WITH PROSPECTS. Mr. Canelo suggests that investors compare price/earnings ratios (the price of a share of stock divided by a company's per-share earnings for a 12-month period) with projected growth rates. "If you think earnings will grow at 20% a year, it's all right to pay 20 times earnings," he says. "But don't pay 30 times earnings for a company that's expected to grow at 15% a year." 

Mr. Canelo thinks the market will probably go higher, but "will be ruthless with stocks if the earnings aren't there." 

Mr. Markese cautions that investors shouldn't slavishly follow any specific price/earnings sell trigger. "If you say sell anytime a company's price/earnings ratio exceeds 15, that knocks out all your growth stocks," he says. "You eliminate companies with substantial prospects that are moving up in price." 

EXAMINE WHAT HAS CHANGED. Tom Schlesinger, market analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc., says investors should consider selling if there has been a fundamental change in a company since they bought its stock.
Say you purchased a stock because of a new product that was in the works.
Now, because of various difficulties, the product has been scrapped.
Time to sell, says Mr. Schlesinger. 

Similarly, he says, suppose you were attracted to a company because of expectations that sales would hit $200 million by 1990.
If things haven't worked out that well, and sales won't hit $200 million until 1992, it's time to consider selling, he says. 

