.START 

It is quite unfortunate that you failed so miserably in reporting the Hurricane Hugo disaster.
Your Sept. 27 page-one article "Charleston Lost Quite a Lot to Hugo, Especially Gentility" leaves the impression that the storm was little more than an inconvenience.
The damage reported focused on a select few who owned irreplaceable historic homes on the Battery. 

Not mentioned were the 50,000 people rendered homeless, and the more than 200,000 out of work for an indeterminable period; the $1 billion-plus in losses to homes and personal property on the barrier islands; the near- and long-term impact on the state's largest industry, tourism, not to mention the human suffering. 

In centering on the disruption of a few proud local customs such as the historichomes tour and the damage to the antiquities, your reporter served to only perpetuate an outdated and stereotypically provincial view of this otherwise thriving port city.
The damage will undoubtedly prove to be one of the epic human and economic disasters of the decade in this country. 

David M. Carroll 

Columbia, S.C. 

Your story was tasteless and insensitive.
Depicting the people of a traumatized city reeling from a disaster of unprecedented proportions was at the very best ludicrous under the circumstances.
Your narrow focus appears to be a contrived attempt to show the people of that historic city to be doddering fools. 

You had to have been blind not to see the scenario there for what it was and is and will continue to be for months and even years -- a part of South Carolina that has sustained a blow that the Red Cross expects will cost that organization alone some $38 million. 

William C. Barksdale Jr. 

Columbia, S.C. 

Charleston is historic and aristocratic, as your reporter said, but not haughty, as he suggested.
Charlestonians are instead indomitable and have contributed mightily to the culture and history of our country for more than 300 years.
I suggest your reporter see Charleston next spring in its full glory.
William C. Stuart III 

Silver Spring, Md. 

