.START 

Bank of New York Co. said it agreed in principle to acquire the credit-card business of Houston-based First City Bancorp. of Texas for between $130 million and $134 million. 

The move, subject to a definitive agreement, is part of a trend by big-city banks that have been buying up credit-card portfolios to expand their business.
Just last month, a Bank of New York subsidiary agreed to buy the credit-card operation of Dreyfus Corp. 's Dreyfus Consumer Bank for $168 million, a transaction that is expected to be completed by the end of the year. 

First City's portfolio includes approximately 640,000 accounts with about $550 million in loans outstanding.
First City, which issues both MasterCard and Visa cards, has agreed to act as an agent bank. 

At the end of the third quarter, Bank of New York's credit-card business consisted of 2.4 million accounts with $3.6 billion in loans outstanding.
Bank of New York is currently the seventh-largest issuer of credit cards in the 

First City said that because of increased competition in the credit-card business, it had decided it either had to expand its own holdings substantially or sell them. "We think there's a good prospect that competition is going to get pretty fierce in this market," said James E. Day, a First City vice president. "We see it becoming a bargain-basement kind of business." 

The company estimated that the transaction would enhance its book value, which stood at $28.55 a share on Sept. 30, by more than $100 million, or about $4 a share.
The company also said the transaction would bolster after-tax earnings by $3.25 a share when completed and boost its primary capital ratio to 7% from 6.63%. 

First City, which recently purchased three small Texas banking concerns, said it would use the proceeds to pursue additional expansion opportunities in the Southwest and elsewhere.
With that possibility in mind, analysts said the transaction was a positive move for First City. 

"I think they'll be able to move faster to make acquisitions in Texas," said Brent Erensel, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette. "That's something they can do very well." 

