.START 

Outside the white-walled headquarters of the socalled Society of Orange Workers, all seems normal in South Africa's abnormal society. 

A pickup truck driven by a white farmer rumbles past with a load of black workers bouncing in the back.
Over at Conradies, the general store, a black stock boy scurries to help an elderly white woman with her packages.
Down the street, a car pulls into the Shell station and is surrounded by black attendants. 

But inside the white walls of the Orange Workers' office -- just about the largest building in town, save for the Dutch Reformed Church and the school -- South Africa's neat racial order is awry.
A dozen white office workers fold newsletters and stuff them into envelopes.
White women serve tea and coffee, and then wash the cups and saucers afterwards.
White children empty the wastepaper baskets and squeegee the windows.
There isn't a black worker in sight.
Not in the kitchen, or the storeroom or the book shop. 

"If we want to have our own nation, then we must be willing to do all the work ourselves," says Hendrik Verwoerd Jr., son of the former prime minister and the leader of the Orange Workers, founded in 1980. 

They do indeed want their own nation.
The pillars of apartheid may be trembling in the rest of South Africa, with Johannesburg opening its public facilities to all races, blacks storming the all-white beaches of the Cape and the government releasing seven leaders of the banned African National Congress.
But here in Morgenzon, a sleepy town amid the corn fields of the eastern Transvaal, the Orange Workers are holding the pillars steady. 

The Orange Workers -- who take their name from William of Orange of the Netherlands, a hero of the Dutch-descended Afrikaners -- believe that the solution to South Africa's racial problems isn't the abolition of apartheid, it's the perfection of apartheid -- complete and total separation of the races. 

Here, then, is where the Orange Workers have come to make apartheid's last stand.
Their idea is to create a city, first, and then an entire nation -- without blacks.
This may seem to be a preposterous and utterly futile effort in Africa.
And the fact that there are only 3,000 card-carrying Orange Workers may put them on the loony fringe.
But their ideal of an Afrikaner homeland, an all-white reserve to be carved out of present-day South Africa, is a mainstream desire of the right-wing, which embraces about one-third of the country's five million whites.
Afrikaner philosophers and theologians have long ruminated on the need for a white homeland.
The Orange Workers are just putting this preaching into practice. 

Thus, farmer Johan Fischer, his T-shirt and jeans covered in grease, crawls around under his planter, tightening bolts and fixing dents.
On almost every other farm in South Africa, black workers do the repairs.
But not here.
Mr. Fischer plows his own fields, sows his own corn and sunflowers, and feeds his own sheep. 

Over at the fiberglass factory, four white workers assemble water tanks on their own, and in their spare time they build townhouses across the road.
On Main Street, Alida Verwoerd and her daughters look after the clothes and fabric shop, then hurry home to fix lunch for the rest of the family.
Down by the stream, a group of Orange Workers puts the finishing touches on a golf course.
If whites want to play there by themselves, says consulting engineer Willem van Heerden, whites should also build it by themselves. 

"If we want to survive as a people," he says, "we have to change our way of life.
The Afrikaner must end his reliance on others." 

In their quest to perfect apartheid, the Orange Workers have discovered a truth that most of privileged white South Africa tries mightily to deny: The master can't become dependent on the slave and expect to remain master forever. 

"If apartheid means you want cheap black labor and all the comforts that go with it, but you also want to exclude the blacks from social and political integration, then these are two contradictions that can't go on forever," says Mr. Verwoerd.
He is sitting in his living room, beneath a huge portrait of his late father, Hendrik F. Verwoerd, apartheid's architect and South African prime minister from 1958 to 1966.
Somewhere, the son sighs, things went terribly wrong with apartheid; today, whites even rely on blacks to police their separation. 

"People took separate development as an opportunity to use black labor without ever getting rid of it.
But my father meant it to mean real separation," says the son. 

The Orange Workers speak sincerely. "We agree with world opinion that the status quo in South Africa is morally wrong," says Pieter Bruwer, the Orange Workers' chief scribe and pamphleteer. "We must either integrate honestly or segregate honestly." 

Morgenzon has long been a special domain of Afrikanerdom.
According to Mr. Verwoerd, the early Afrikaner pioneers were the first people to settle in the eastern Transvaal, even before the blacks.
Then, when Morgenzon was incorporated in 1908, the farmer who owned the land stipulated that only whites could reside in town; blacks could work there, but they had to leave at night. 

Today, Morgenzon is a town of 800 whites and two paved roads.
Weeds push up through the cracks in the sidewalks, and many houses and storefronts are empty.
There are few factories and no mines.
It was an ideal place for the Orange Workers to start their new nation, unencumbered by the demographics that have undermined apartheid elsewhere in South Africa. 

So far, about 150 Orange Workers have moved here, spending nearly $1 million buying up property over the past three years.
Still, complete and total segregation remains elusive.
Just beyond the city limits is a shantytown of 2,000 blacks who are employed throughout the area.
Despite the Orange Workers' intention to put them all out of work, they are in no hurry to leave.
A young man called July (that's when he was born), who works at the railroad station just up the street from the Orange Workers office, points at the whitewalled building and says matter-of-factly, "We're not allowed in there, that's all I know." 

The 650-or-so local whites who aren't Orange Workers are more troubled.
Try as they might, they just can't conceive of life without black workers. 

"Impossible, impossible," say the Conradies, an elderly couple who have run the general store for decades. "We can't do without their help," says Mrs. Conradie. "Oh no.
We need them and I thank God for them." 

Over at the Shell station, owner Rudi van Dyk, who doubles as Morgenzon's mayor, worries that the Orange Workers have made his town the laughingstock of the nation. "What they want us to do just isn't practical," he says, noting that he employs 16 blacks. "I couldn't afford to hire 16 whites.
The only Afrikaners who would be willing to work for this salary wouldn't know how to handle money." 

Back at the Verwoerd house, Hendrik Sr. peers down over the shoulder of Hendrik Jr.
The son believes that when the Afrikaners finally realize there is no turning back the integration of South African society and politics, Morgenzon will boom. 

"We urge our people not to wait until they have to fight for their own nation," says Mr. Verwoerd. "By populating a place now, we make ourselves a power any new government will have to take into account." Curiously, he compares the Orange Workers to the ANC, which his father outlawed in 1960. "The ANC won't be stopped until there is a provision for black aspirations," says Mr. Verwoerd. "Likewise, no government will stop this idea of the Afrikaners." 

He apologizes for sounding pushy. "Look," he says, "If the rest of South Africa wants to have an integrated melting pot, that's their choice.
We'll leave them alone.
We just want to have our own cup of tea." And they will even serve it themselves. 

