.START 

Housing construction sank in September to its lowest level since the last recession, the Commerce Department reported. 

Work began on homes and apartments at an annual rate of 1,263,000 units last month, down 5.2% from August, the department said.
The September decline followed an even steeper drop of 6.2% in August and left housing starts at their weakest since October 1982, when the country was nearing the end of a recession.
Originally the department had reported the August decline as 5%. 

The numbers suggest that the housing industry is still suffering the effects of the Federal Reserve's battle against inflation.
The industry had shown signs of recovery this summer, after the central bank began to relax its clamp on credit, allowing interest rates to drop a bit after pushing them up for a year.
Sales of new homes rose and inventories of houses, which had been climbing, dropped. 

But last month new construction in all types of homes waned, from single-family houses to large apartment complexes. 

"It's pretty much weak across the board," said Martin Regalia, chief economist of the National Council of Savings Institutions. 

Mr. Regalia said the industry may be reluctant to step up building at the moment for fear the inventories of unsold homes will increase again. 

Another reason for the weakness, he said, may be that mortgage rates have hit a plateau since they began edging down after a peak in March.
In August, rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages started creeping up a bit, but they inched down again through September. 

"Rates haven't really peeled off that much," Mr. Regalia said. "We've kind of settled now into an interest-rate environment that's fairly high." 

Work was begun on single family homes -- the core of the housing market -- at an annual rate of 971,000 in September, a drop of 2.1% from the previous month.
That followed a 3.3% decline in August. 

Construction of apartments and other multi-family dwellings slipped 2.2% to an annual rate of 1,022,000 following a 3.5% decline in August. 

The number of building permits issued for future construction dropped 2.4% to a 1,296,000 annual rate after rising 3.7% in August. 

All the numbers were adjusted for normal seasonal variations in building activity.
The housing starts numbers, however, are one of the least precise of the government's economic indicators and are often revised significantly as more information is collected. 

