.START 

London shares rallied to post strong gains after initial fears evaporated that the California earthquake would depress Wall Street prices. 

Tokyo stocks, which rebounded strongly Tuesday, extended their gains yesterday, but most other Asian and Pacific markets closed sharply lower. 

In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index jumped 34.6 points to close at its intraday high of 2170.1.
The index was under pressure for most of the morning over concerns that the effects of Tuesday night's major earthquake in the San Francisco area would undermine the U.S. market.
The mood changed after dealers reappraised the direct impact of the disaster on shares and Wall Street rebounded from early losses. 

The Financial Times 30-share index settled 27.8 points higher at 1758.5.
Volume was 449.3 million shares, the slowest of a hectic week, compared with 643.4 million Tuesday. 

U.K. composite, or non-life, insurers, which some equity analysts said might be heavily hit by the earthquake disaster, helped support the London market by showing only narrow losses in early trading.
The insurers' relative resilience gave the market time to reappraise the impact of the California disaster on U.K. equities, dealers said. 

Dealers said the market still hasn't shaken off its nervousness after its bumpy ride of the past several sessions, caused by interest-rate increases last week and Wall Street's 6.9% plunge Friday.
But technical factors, including modest gains in the value of the pound, helped draw buying back into the market and reverse losses posted a day earlier. 

Among composite insurers, General Accident rose 10 pence to #10.03 ($15.80) a share, Guardian Royal climbed 5 to 217 pence, Sun Alliance rose 3 to 290, and Royal Insurance jumped 12 to 450.
Life insurers fared similarly, with Legal & General advancing 3 to 344, although Prudential fell 2 to 184 1/2.
Pearl Group rose 5 to 628, and Sun Life finished unchanged at #10.98. 

Most banking issues retreated after a sector downgrade by Warburg Securities, although National Westminister showed strength on positive comments from brokerage firms about its long-term prospects.
NatWest, the most actively traded of the banks, finished at 300, up 1. 

B.A.T Industries fell in early dealings but recovered to finish at 754, up 5.
Dealers said the market was nervous ahead of a special B.A.T holders' meeting today.
The session is to consider a defensive plan to spin off assets to fend off Sir James Goldsmith's #13.4 billion bid for B.A.T. 

The recent stock market drop has shaken confidence in the plan, but dealers said the shares fell initially on questions about whether Mr. Goldsmith's highly leveraged bid will come to fruition. 

Trading was suspended in WCRS Group, a U.K. advertising concern, pending an announcement that it is buying the remaining 50% of France's Carat Holding for 2.02 billion French francs ($318.7 million) and expanding commercial and equity ties with advertising group Eurocom. 

Merchant banker Morgan Grenfell climbed 14 to 406 on renewed takeover speculation.
S.G. Warburg, also mentioned in the rumor mill, jumped 14 at to 414.
Jaguar advanced 19 to 673 as traders contemplated a potential battle between General Motors and Ford Motor for control of the U.K. luxury auto maker. 

Tokyo's Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 111.48 points, or 0.32%, to 35107.56.
The index gained 527.39 Tuesday.
Volume was estimated at 800 million shares, compared with 678 million Tuesday.
Declining issues outnumbered advancers 505-455, with 172 unchanged.
The Tokyo Stock Price Index of all issues listed in the first section, which gained 41.76 Tuesday, was up 0.24 points, or 0.01%, at 2642.88. 

In early trading in Tokyo Thursday, the Nikkei index rose 135.09 points to 35242.65. 

On Wednesday, shares were pushed up by index-related buying on the part of investment trusts as well as small orders from individuals and corporations, traders said. 

Institutions, meanwhile, stepped back to the sidelines as the direction of U.S. interest rates remained unclear.
The uncertainty was multiplied by the persistent strength of the dollar, traders said, and by the U.S. trade deficit, which widened by 31% in August from the previous month. 

Traders and analysts said they didn't see any effect on Tokyo stocks from the California earthquake.
The impact on Japanese insurers and property owners with interests in the San Francisco area is still being assessed, they said. 

Buying was scattered across a wide range of issues, making the session fairly characterless, traders said.
With uncertainty still hanging over interest rates and the dollar, the market failed to find a focus that might lead to further investor commitments, they said. 

Some traders said the popularity of issues that gained yesterday won't last long, as investors will rotate their buying choices over the short term. 

Interest rate-sensitive shares such as steel, construction and electric utility companies, which rose early in the week, saw their advance weaken yesterday. 

Traders said these issues need large-volume buying to push up their prices, so substantial gains aren't likely unless institutional investors participate. 

An outstanding issue in yesterday's session was Mitsubishi Rayon, which surged 95 to 905 yen ($6.34) a share.
Its popularity was due to speculation about the strong earnings potential of a new type of plastic wrap for household use, a trader at County Natwest Securities Japan said. 

Some laggard food issues attracted bargain-hunters, traders said.
Kirin Brewery was up 100 at 2,000, and Ajinomoto gained 70 to 2,840.
Pharmaceuticals were mostly higher, with SS Pharmaceutical gaining 140 to 1,980. 

Shares closed lower in other major Asian and Pacific markets, including Sydney, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taipei, Wellington, Seoul and Manila.
Most of those markets had rebounded the day before from Monday's slide.
But unlike the Tokyo exchange, they failed to extend the rise to a second session. 

Elsewhere, prices surged for a second day in Frankfurt, closed higher in Zurich, Stockholm and Amsterdam and were broadly lower in Milan, Paris and Brussels.
South African gold stocks ended marginally firmer. 

In Brussels, it was the first trading day for most major shares since stocks tumbled on Wall Street Friday.
Trading had been impeded by a major computer failure that took place before the start of Monday's session. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

