.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

PUTS AND CALLS, STOCK MARKET PATOIS for options to sell or buy a company's shares, were long an arcane Wall Street art best left to the experts, who used them either as a hedge or for pure speculation. 

Options lost some of their mystery in 1973 when the Chicago Board of Trade set up a special exchange to deal in them.
Until then, options had been traded only in the over-the-counter market, mostly in New York, and in an almost invisible secondary market operating chiefly by telephone. 

The Chicago Board of Trade, the No. 1 U.S. grain market, had long chafed under the attention won by its innovative archrival, the livestock-dealing Mercantile Exchange.
So the men who ran the grain pits listened when Joseph Sullivan, a 35-year-old former Wall Street Journal newsman, offered them the idea of all-options trading.
After four year of tinkering and $2.4 million in seed money, the board set up the new marketplace, titled it the Chicago Board Options Exchange, and named Sullivan its first president. 

The beginnings were modest.
The CBOE opened for business on April 26, 1973, in what had been a Board of Trade lunchroom.
It listed just 16 options to buy a "pilot list" of stocks on the New York Stock Exchange. (Puts, or sell options, would not be added until 1977.) The 282 members had paid $10,000 apiece for seats. (The 1989 price: $250,000.) 

The first day's business was 911 contracts (each for 100 shares of one of the listed stocks).
By the end of 1973, the number of "underlying" Big Board stocks had been increased to 50 and the options exchange had run up volume of 1.1 million contracts.
A year later, it was 5.7 million.
Last year, more than 1,800 traders on the CBOE bought and sold 112 million contracts on 178 listed stocks, 60% of all U.S. listed options trading. 

The new exchange drew instant recognition from an unwelcome quarter.
The government, campaigning against fixed brokerage commissions, promptly sued the CBOE over its minimum-fee system. 

