.START 

Spooked investors, despite their stampede to dump takeover stocks, should hold on tight to their Jaguar shares. 

That's the view of some analysts here who argue that Britain's leading maker of luxury cars still may have two U.S. auto giants battling for it. 

Yesterday, Ford Motor disclosed that it has raised its holding in Jaguar to 10.4% from 5%.
Both Ford and its rival General Motors recently set their sights on grabbing significant minority stakes in the British company. 

Ford's latest move increases the pressure on GM to complete its current talks with Jaguar quickly.
GM is likely to reach the cooperative operating pact it has been seeking in about two weeks, knowledgeable individuals say. 

At that point investors may face a long, bumpy ride.
A victor in the fight for Jaguar may not emerge until after the expiration late next year of British government takeover restrictions.
The curbs prevent a buyer from purchasing more than 15% of Jaguar shares without permission. "This is an exceptionally odd takeover battle," says London analyst Christopher Will of Shearson Lehman Hutton. 

Jaguar's American depositary receipts were up 3/8 yesterday in a down market, closing at 10 3/8. (Jaguar's ADRs make the company one of the most widely held United Kingdom stocks in the U.S., with more than one-fourth of its shares owned there.) 

Jaguar topped the most-active list for the U.S. over-the-counter market Monday.
And on London's Stock Exchange Monday, 18.5 million shares were traded, far above the usual volume.
Ford's share purchases undoubtedly accounted for much of Monday's heavy trading. 

Last week, many Jaguar shareholders took their money and ran.
Fears that Ford's ardor might be cooling put Jaguar shares into reverse after GM confirmed its friendly negotiations with Jaguar.
But yesterday's announcement indicates that Ford hasn't lost interest. 

Both Shearson's Mr. Will and Stephen Reitman, European auto analyst at the London brokerage firm UBS-Phillips & Drew, recently switched their Jaguar recommendations to hold from buy. "Sit tight" through the coming volatility, Mr. Reitman suggests, though he concedes that many small investors will find Jaguar's zigzags "too hard to swallow." 

But a crucial point is how Ford reacts when GM, the world's largest auto maker, firms up its proposed deal with Jaguar.
At the moment, Ford executives will say little beyond reiterating their desire to raise Ford's Jaguar stake to about 15%. 

GM is expected to inject roughly #200 million ($316 million) by acquiring some Jaguar shares, and then win Jaguar management's promise of an eventual 30% stake.
Analysts believe the car makers also will create joint ventures to develop new executive models, doubling Jaguar's yearly output of 50,000 cars. 

Jaguar shareholders would have to bless such a far-reaching accord.
Ford might challenge the proposal by offering a full bid if holders and the U.K. government agreed to drop the anti-takeover barrier early. "I think Ford is going to come out with full guns blazing," Mr. Reitman says. "Ford wants {Jaguar} very much." U.S. takeover-stock speculators, who may own between 20% and 30% of Jaguar, could give Ford enough votes to block the GM deal. 

GM might counterbid.
Then, Mr. Will says, "you get a bidding war between two very rich, very determined international companies." He believes Jaguar's share price could zoom to between #8 and #10 ($12.60 to $15.80). 

"There's quite a bit of value left in the {Jaguar} shares here even though they have run up" lately, says Doug Johnson, a fund manager for Seattle-based Safeco Asset Management.
At the moment, he intends to keep the firm's 180,000 Jaguar shares. 

The risk is that Jaguar's share price could slump if GM's agreement with Jaguar effectively locks out its U.S. rival. "Ford's appetite to attack {Jaguar} could gradually wane over time, particularly if Saab is a reasonably attractive proposition," says John Lawson, an auto analyst at London's Nomura Research Institute.
He thinks Saab-Scania AB on Friday will announce the sale of 50% of its car division to Ford; the companies have been discussing closer cooperation for months. 

Clifford Stahl, president and chief investment officer of C-S Capital Advisors Inc., two weeks ago sold his Cincinnati firm's 107,100 Jaguar ADRs at about 10 each, making a tidy profit on a holding purchased at 4 7/8 in early May. "I thought the probabilities of {a bidding war} happening were less," he says.
Of course, that was before Ford's latest move. 

Jaguar 

(OTC; Symbol: JAGRY) 

Business: Luxury cars 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Revenue: $1.71 billion 

Net income: $44.9 million; or 25 cents a share 

First half ended, June 30, 1989: 

Net loss: $1.7 million vs. net income: $21.2 million; or 12 cents a share 

Averae daily trading volume: 

Ordinary shares outstanding: 182.9 million 

NOTE: All figures are translated into U.S. dollars based on current exchange rates. 

