.START 

Lung-cancer mortality rates for people under 45 years of age have begun to decline, federal researchers report. 

The drop is particularly large for white males, although black males and white and black women also show lower mortality rates. 

A report in this week's issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute also projects that overall U.S. mortality rates from lung cancer, the leading cause of cancer death, should begin to drop in several years if cigarette smoking continues to abate. 

The report, which comes 25 years after the U.S. Surgeon General issued a report warning against the dangers of smoking, is the strongest indication to date that the reduction in smoking is leading to lower death rates from lung cancer. "What this is saying is that the surgeon general's message is having an impact," said Melvyn Tockman, an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health in Baltimore. 

The National Cancer Institute report compares mortality rates of two groups of people between the ages of 35 and 44 a decade apart.
The death rate from lung cancer of white males aged 35 to 44 in the mid-1970s was 13.4 per 100,000, but the mortality rate of the same age group in the mid-1980s was 9.6, a decline of 28.7%.
Measured the same way, the decline for black males was 14.2%.
The drop in mortality rates for women was less steep -- 8.9% for blacks and 5.3% for whites. 

The study, by Susan Devesa, William Blot and Joseph Fraumeni of the institute's staff, also shows that the incidence of lung cancer as well as the death rate declined over the decade for all groups in the 35-44 age bracket, except black men. 

Although lung-cancer mortality rates are increasing for the nation as a whole, the report projects that death rates will begin to decline in the 1990s for men and after the year 2000 for women. 

Lung-cancer mortality rates increase with age and are continuing to rise for all age groups over 55, with sharp increases for everybody but white men.
But Dr. Fraumeni, one of the authors of the report, said "the declining rates we're seeing for younger people we believe may be a harbinger of declining mortality in the future." However, he stressed that the improvement depends on a continued reduction in smoking. 

"Even though these favorable trends in lung-cancer mortality affect all sex and race groups, they can't be taken for granted," the report says. "Smoking prevention programs should reach larger segments of the population, especially children, adolescents and minorities." 

An editorial in the NCI Journal says the report of declining lung-cancer mortality "among young men and women in the U.S. indicates that we finally may be winning the battle -- this even in a country where the tobacco industry spends over $2 billion a year for promotion of the addictive habit of smoking." 

But the editorial, by Jan Stjernsward of the World Health Organization, notes that tobacco consumption and lung-cancer mortality rates are rising in developing countries. "Non-smoking should be established as the norm of social behavior" around the world, the editorial says, through the enactment of laws that limit advertising, boost tobacco prices and promote anti-smoking education. 

Asked for comment, Walker Merryman, a vice president of the Tobacco Institute, said new efforts to restrict tobacco advertising in the U.S. could violate the First Amendment protection of free speech. 

According to the American Cancer Society, smoking is responsible for 85% of the lung-cancer cases among men and 75% among women.
The NCI report attributes the differences in mortality rates by race to different smoking patterns.
A higher proportion of black men smoke than white men.
While nearly equal percentages of black and white women currently smoke, in both sexes more whites have given up smoking than blacks. 

In comparing changes in mortality rates over the past decade, the NCI study looked only at blacks and whites.
Asians and native Americans weren't studied; Hispanics were included with whites. 

Recent changes in average annual age-specific lung-cancer rates per 100,000 population by race and sex. 

White Males 

White Females 

Black Males 

Black Females 

Source: Journal of the National Cancer Institute 

