.START 

Stock-market tremors again shook bond prices, while the dollar turned in a mixed performance. 

Early yesterday, investors scrambled to buy Treasury bonds for safety as stock prices plummeted and fears mounted of a replay of Friday.
But stocks later recovered, erasing most of their early declines.
That cut short the rally in Treasury bonds and depressed prices moderately below late Monday's levels. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average, down more than 60.25 points early in the day, finished 18.65 points lower at 2638.73.
Long-term Treasury issues declined about half a point, or $5 for each $1,000 face amount. 

"The stock market clearly is leading the bond markets," said Jack Conlon, an executive vice president at Nikko Securities. "People are breathing a major sigh of relief that the world didn't end Monday morning" or yesterday. 

Gold, a closely watched barometer of investor anxiety, was little changed.
The dollar initially fell against other major currencies on news that the U.S. trade deficit surged in August to $10.77 billion.
But the dollar later rebounded, finishing slightly higher against the yen although slightly lower against the mark. 

Federal Reserve officials sent another signal of their determination to shore up investor confidence.
In an apparent attempt to keep a lid on short-term interest rates, the Fed once again pumped money into the banking system.
But the Fed move was a small gesture, traders said. 

Fed officials appear reluctant to ease their credit grip any further because a bold move doesn't appear necessary, several investment managers said.
The Fed has allowed a key short-term interest rate to decline about one-quarter percentage point.
The federal funds rate on overnight loans between banks has been hovering around 8 3/4%, down from 9% previously. 

Although stocks have led bonds this week, some traders predict that relationship will reverse during the next few weeks.
Nikko's Mr. Conlon fears a huge wave of Treasury borrowing early next month will drive down Treasury bond prices.
That, coupled with poor third-quarter corporate-earnings comparisons, "will make trouble for the equity market for the next two to three months," he says. 

But several other traders contend investors have overreacted to junk-bond jitters, and that stock prices will continue to recover. "They shot the whole orchestra just because the piano player hit a bad note," said Laszlo Birinyi, president of Birinyi Associates Inc., referring to the stock market's plunge Friday on news of trouble in financing the UAL Corp. buy-out. 

In major market activity: 

Treasury bond prices fell.
The yield on 30-year Treasury bonds climbed back above 8%, ending the day at 8.03%. 

The dollar was mixed.
Late yesterday in New York, the dollar rose to 142.75 yen from 141.80 yen Monday, but fell to 1.8667 marks from 1.8685 marks. 

