.START 

Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi set a date next month for general elections that some analysts say could cost him and his ruling Congress (I) Party control of the government. 

Other analysts say the Indian leader could retain control with a slim majority or be forced to rule as the dominant partner in a coalition with other parties. 

Elections in this large, diverse and passionate nation are always hard to predict.
Much depends on the opposition, a loose group of regional and ideological parties led by former Gandhi cabinet minister Vishwanath Pratap Singh. 

The biggest certainty is that the elections will be a vote for or against Mr. Gandhi and his five years in power -- five years of ups and downs, promises and disappointments and wide fluctuations in popularity. 

Yesterday, four days after an unusual parliamentary defeat for the ruling party, Mr. Gandhi called elections for the lower house of Parliament on Nov. 22 and 24.
The elections will be held in different states on one of the two days. (The lower house's five-year term expires in January; the Parliament's upper house is appointed.) 

The elections will be a rigorous test for the 45-year-old prime minister and Congress (I), which in various forms has ruled for 40 of India's 42 years of independence.
After a landslide win in 1984 in polls held after the assassination of his mother, Indira Gandhi, Mr. Gandhi saw his popularity begin a roller coaster ride. 

His early promises to make India a modern nation remain bogged down in bloated bureaucracy.
His pledge to clean up local administration and Indian politics, including his own party, went unfulfilled.
His "Mr. Clean" image was muddied by an arms-kickback scandal, which will be a major campaign issue.
Some analysts predict that disappointment in Mr. Gandhi's spent pledge to reduce corruption and heavy-handed local government will crest at the polls. "There's a wide feeling of indignation across the country," says Bhabani Sen Gupta of the Center for Policy Research, in New Delhi. "I think the people will be judging the regime by a petty policeman, by a corrupt revenue collector.
This could be a big protest against an administrative failure." 

Even if the Congress (I) retains control of the government, Mr. Gandhi's ability to push through major initiatives might be hobbled by a thinner majority.
Economic analysts call his trail-blazing liberalization of the Indian economy incomplete, and many are hoping for major new liberalizations if he is returned firmly to power. 

The Lok Sabha, or lower house of Parliament, has 542 elected and two appointed seats.
In 1984, the Congress (I) captured 405 seats, the largest victory in the history of Indian democracy.
The landslide was fueled by panic that prevailed in India at the time.
Mrs. Gandhi had been assassinated by separatist Sikhs, and many Indians feared their country might split apart.
In the previous three general elections, similar national issues clinched the vote.
In 1971, the Congress Party won after India's victory in the Bangladesh war.
In 1977, Mrs. Gandhi was thrown out of office after her 19-month emergency rule, and in 1980, after her successors made a mess of their three years in power, she was restored to office. 

Most political analysts say that if Mr. Gandhi's opposition unites to field single candidates in most precincts, the Congress (I) will lose big.
But if the opposition remains fractured, the Congress (I) could win a small majority, or lead a coalition government.
Chimanbhai Mehta, a parliamentarian and former Gandhi ally, predicts Congress (I) will win only 150 seats, a quarter of the house, if the opposition fields single candidates in 80% of the races.
Analysts say the opposition will struggle this week to unite, and its success will be clear only when it announces its final list of parliamentary candidates. 

The arms-kickback scandal is likely to be one of the big talking points in the campaign, but it's unclear how it is viewed by average Indian voters.
In 1986, India signed a $1.4 billion contract with AB Bofors, a unit of Nobel Industries Sweden AB, to purchase 400 artillery pieces.
The contract was negotiated by the countries' two prime ministers, and was supposed to be free of commissions or agents' costs. 

In April 1987, evidence surfaced that commissions were paid.
The opposition charged that the money was used to bribe Indian government officials, an allegation denied by Mr. Gandhi's administration.
But many of his statements on the issue in Parliament subsequently were proven wrong by documentary evidence.
The scandal has faded and flared, but recent disclosures propelled it back onto the front pages, and that has helped galvanize the opposition, which last week blocked passage of two constitutional amendment bills.
It was the first time in 20 years that such government bills were defeated. 

In a country where a bribe is needed to get a phone, a job, and even into a school, the name Bofors has become a potent rallying cry against the government.
That illustrates the kind of disappointment many Indians feel toward Mr. Gandhi, whom they zestfully elected and enthusiastically supported in his first two years in power.
His term has produced no spectacular failures in politics, in the economy or on the military front, and has chalked up some successes.
But the average Indian had tremendous hope in the youthful leader and his promise to make both government and the ruling party more effective and less corrupt.
His failures in those two areas deeply, and sometimes bitterly, disappointed many Indians. 

"We don't like the Congress (I)," says Sooraji Jath, a farmer in the western state of Gujarat. "The Congress government is taking the farmers' bread and not giving us any support.
When there are well problems, light problems, road problems, the government tells us to forget it." 

The greatest thing going for Mr. Gandhi and the Congress (I) Party is the poor reputation of the opposition.
Even if it unites for the elections, its coherence is likely to be temporary.
When the Congress (I) lost the 1977 election, following Mrs. Gandhi's hated emergency rule, a similar coalition took power and then disintegrated.
Many Indians fear a repeat of that experience. 

March 24, 1986: AB Bofors, a unit of Nobel Industries Sweden AB, enters into a $1.4 billion contract with India's Defense Ministry to supply 400 Bofors FH-77B 155-mm field howitzer guns.
In 1985, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, in his talks with then Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, imposed the condition that the contract have no middlemen. 

April 16, 1987: Swedish National Radio reports that about $40 million -- nearly 3% of the total contract -- was paid by Bofors as commissions to middlemen. 

June 1, 1987: Sweden's National Audit Bureau releases its report confirming payment of about $40 million to unidentified Indians.
The report says that investigations were severely hampered by lack of cooperation from Bofors.
Bofors says it can't disclose the names of the middlemen because it would jeopardize industrial confidentiality.
A portion of the report containing names of the middlemen is withheld by officials citing bank secrecy requirements. 

Aug. 6, 1987: Prime Minister Gandhi tells the Indian Parliament, ". . . neither I nor any member of my family has received any consideration in these transactions.
That is the truth." 

Aug. 26, 1987: Bofors admits payments of $41 million to middlemen. 

April 22, 1988: The Hindu newspaper publishes facsimiles of bank documents for foreign-exchange remittances and letters between Bofors and certain private companies related to the sale of the guns to India. 

April 26, 1988: A parliamentary investigative committee dominated by the Congress (I) Party concludes that there were no middlemen in the deal and no payment to any Indian individual or company. 

July 18, 1989: The comptroller and auditor-general of India reports serious lapses in the government's technical and financial evaluation of the Bofors deal. 

Sept. 15, 1989: Retired army Chief of Staff Krishnaswami Sundarji discloses in an interview that he suggested in May 1987 that the government cancel the Bofors contract.
According to Gen. Sundarji, that would have forced Bofors to disclose the names of the middlemen who received kickbacks from the company.
His recommendation was rejected by the government. 

Oct. 9. 1989: The Hindu newspaper publishes the withheld portion of the Swedish National Audit Bureau's report.
The disclosures state that commissions were paid by Bofors to an Indian agent of the arms company. 

