.START 

Bankers Trust New York Corp. became the latest major U.S. bank to increase reserves for its loans to less-developed countries, making a $1.6 billion third-quarter addition to its provision.
The bank also said it expects to report a $1.42 billion loss for the third quarter and a loss for the full year. 

The new reserves bring the company's provision for loans to Third World countries to $2.6 billion, or 85% of Bankers Trust's medium and long-term loans to these countries. 

"Step up to the plate and take the big swing.
Get the problem behind you and don't look back," said James J. McDermott, analyst at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, in approving of the move.
Bankers Trust "has had the capacity to do this for some time," the analyst said.
He expects Citicorp to take a similar step this year. 

Citicorp yesterday reported a 9% third-quarter earnings drop, which analysts called a bit disappointing, while Manufacturers Hanover Corp. posted a $789 million loss for the quarter after adding $950 million to its reserve for loans to less-developed countries. 

Three other major U.S. banks posted earnings increases.
Wells Fargo & Co. of San Francisco posted a 17% jump.
PNC Financial Corp., the parent of Pittsburgh National Bank, reported net income climbed 9.8%, while net for Banc One Corp. of Columbus, Ohio, grew 3.8%. 

Citicorp 

Analysts were only slightly disappointed by Citicorp's numbers. "There's nothing in here that's horrible and nothing to make you think they're setting the world on fire," said Carole Berger, analyst for C.J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc. Earnings from the bank's global consumer business grew 27%. "The consumer business continues to drive the earnings stream," said Mr. McDermott of Keefe, Bruyette & Woods. 

Corporate finance and trading results in member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development were "relatively flat, sometimes choppy," the bank said, and profit for the area sank 27%. 

The cross-border loan portfolio reflected "adjustment problems and episodic payment patterns," the bank said no interest payments from Argentina in the nine months and none from Brazil in the third quarter, while Venezuela brought itself "substantially current." Overall, the portfolio narrowed its quarterly loss to $70 million from $80 million a year earlier. 

"People were waiting to see if we would take an additional provision" for medium-term and long-term loans to less-developed countries, a Citicorp spokesman said.
But he reiterated the bank's position that it is comfortable with the current level of $2.6 billion, covering about 30% of the $8.9 billion of such loans outstanding. 

Ronald I. Mandle, analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., called Citicorp's venture-capital gains of $93 million before taxes "strong." A "concerning" item the analyst cited was the 10% jump in expenses, which the bank attributes to costs of expanding both its consumer credit-card operations and its overseas branch business.
Citicorp's spokesman said, however, that the bank is maintaining those expenses in proportion to revenue growth. 

Wells Fargo 

Wells Fargo continued to generate one of the highest profit margins among major banks, minimizing a drop in net interest margin with 13% third-quarter growth in high-yielding business loans and similar growth in mortgages.
Its margin fell only seven basis points, or 7/100ths of a percentage point, from a year ago, compared with a 13-point drop at Security Pacific Corp. and much larger declines among banks in other parts of the country. 

As a result, Wells Fargo's net interest income rose $36.3 million, or 7%, to $537 million for the quarter.
Non-interest income fell slightly to $191.9 million from $193.3 million, while Wells Fargo continued to rigorously control non-interest expense, which was almost flat at $393.4 million. 

The combination of solid loan growth with tight expense control gave Wells Fargo a 1.25% return on average assets for the quarter, about 40% higher than Security Pacific's and a profit ratio matched by only two or three other major banks in the U.S. Wells Fargo's return on equity increased to 24.4% from 23.8%. 

Wells Fargo has sold all of its non-trade loans made to less-developed countries, and managed to partly reverse the sharp rise in domestic non-accrual loans, which fell 8% from the previous quarter to $806.8 million from $880.9 million.
But the amount was still 39% higher than the year-ago level, and 25% higher as a percentage of total loans.
That trend, and Wells Fargo's heavy exposure to leveraged buy-outs, are about the only worries analysts have about Wells Fargo's financial picture.
Wells Fargo is rebuilding its loan-loss reserve, which increased to $711 million at Sept. 30 from $664 million the previous quarter but was down from $852 million a year ago, when the bank still had some shaky foreign loans. 

Manufacturers Hanover 

Manufacturers Hanover said that excluding the addition to its reserves, certain tax benefits, and a one-time $16 million gain on the sale of an interest in a foreign leasing company, third-quarter earnings were $75 million.
The comparable year-earlier number was $56 million, a spokesman said. 

The bank's additional provisions brought reserves for loans to less-developed countries to $2.4 billion, covering 36% of its medium and long-term loans outstanding to these nations. 

The net interest margin-the difference between the bank's cost of funds and what it receives as interest payments -- improved in the quarter, as did certain areas of wholesale banking. 

Fees from syndicating loans dropped 48%, to $21 million. "We didn't take part in a lot of deals" in the quarter "because their credit quality was poor," the spokesman said.
Expenses unrelated to interest rose 5.4%, to $541 million. 

PNC Financial 

PNC Financial cited higher income from sources unrelated to interest and said it continues to cut costs. 

Net interest income in the third quarter edged up 1.4%, to $317.7 million.
Trust income grew 15%, to $49.9 million, while service charges, fees and commissions increased 22%, to $79.4 million. 

The bank's total allowance for credit losses was $502.1 million, or 1.82% of total loans. 

