.START 

Conservatives have an important decision to make this fall.
At the recent meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, the Bush administration announced its intention to decide by yearend the size of the next increase in the IMF's capital base.
While the U.S. share of the increase probably will not reach the $12 billion or more implicit in the IMF's request for a doubling of its $90 billion capital, the administration probably will agree to a multibillion-dollar increase.
This would be consistent with its unwavering support for the Brady Plan and G-7 exchange-rate intervention, and with its financial commitment to Mexico, Poland and others. 

The IMF has several reasons for requesting the increase.
Its role in the economies of developing countries has grown steadily since the 1970s.
The size and pace of disbursements will accelerate further under the Brady Plan, which promises larger and earlier disbursements to approved countries. 

At least three other factors have encouraged the IMF to insist on increased capital.
First, it argues that its capital base must be increased in order to maintain its size relative to world financial markets, for which it feels some responsibility.
Second, the World Bank's recent $75 billion capital increase -- $14 billion from the U.S. -- has left the IMF feeling less than first fiddle among international financial institutions.
Third, the IMF would like to meet Japan's request for increased ownership (currently 4.5%).
Japan has supported a larger role for the IMF in developing-country debt issues, and is an important financial resource for IMF-guided programs in developing countries. 

While international politics may argue for the capital increase, there is a clear economic case against it.
Opponents of the increase argue that the IMF practices central planning while supporting ineffective governments.
They question whether the IMF has any role in developing countries, given its original mandate to assist industrial countries in balance-of-payments emergencies. 

Opponents show that there are already more funds available than commendable reform efforts.
They worry that new IMF funding of developing countries will simply end up substituting IMF debt for reschedulable commercial bank debt, a bad trade all around.
They believe microeconomics, which addresses the problems of markets, investment climate and management practices, is the key to developing-country growth, not the IMF's Keynesian focus on trade deficits, quarterly targets and government debt.
They point at the numerous developing-country governments that have inflated, taxed and regulated themselves into despair under successive IMF programs. 

Decisions on increases in the IMF's capital base traditionally are made by the administration, with subsequent authorization by Congress.
The last U.S. congressional authorization, in 1983, was a political donnybrook and carried a $6 billion housing program along with it to secure adequate votes. 

The politics of the 1990 congressional authorization are likely to be similar to those of previous authorizations.
Liberals may support the stabilizing, quasi-governmental role of the IMF on two conditions: that the administration give assurances that liberal Democrats' support will not be used against them in congressional re-election campaigns; and that the legislation address -- with dollars -- social and environmental concerns.
Conservative Republicans will be given the choice of supporting or fighting their party's popular president in an election year. 

A U.S. decision to refuse the IMF its capital increase, or limit it to 25%, would bring a major change in international economic policy, and could not be taken lightly.
Commentators would fret over the implications for the G-7 coordination process and the stability of world financial markets.
Because commercial banks and the developing-country governments believe they will get a piece of any capital increase, a scaled-down IMF mission would leave both feeling shortchanged.
Furthermore, a U.S. rejection of the capital increase (and transfer of shares to Japan) would give Japan an argument against future calls for economic burden-sharing. 

On the other hand, a decision to increase the IMF's capital would reinforce the central economic role of multilateral institutions in developing countries.
With the increase, even more developing-country energy and talent would be diverted from creating profitable economic systems to setting up economic planning ministries that generate IMF-approved economic plans.
Upping the ante could slow economic development even further, as countries delay market-opening steps in anticipation of richer multilateral support. 

Conservatives should take a position prior to the administration's year-end deadline.
The issues are too important to be left to the financial and budget ministries fighting over the size of the capital increase, rather than its purpose.
If conservatives don't support an increase in the IMF's capital, then it is incumbent on them to speak up now and explain the alternative. 

Mr. Malpass directs the Republican staff of the Joint Economic Committee of Congress. 

