.START 

An unexpectedly sharp widening in the U.S. trade gap for August dragged the dollar lower Tuesday, but profit-taking on short positions helped the currency rebound to close mixed against major counterparts. 

While the market kept careful tabs on Wall Street's gyrations, it shrugged off a modest downturn in equities to bid the dollar well above the day's lows. 

Soon after the release of the U.S. trade figures, the dollar plunged to an intraday low of 140.95 yen.
It also declined against the mark but didn't reach its intraday low of 1.8435 marks until two hours later. 

The unit stabilized about midday New York time at around 1.85 marks and 141 yen, prompting unconfirmed rumors that the U.S. Federal Reserve had intervened to blunt the unit's tumble.
The dollar finished at its intraday highs. 

Dealers noted that the foreign exchange market's initial bearish reaction to the U.S. trade figures was tempered later by a "calmer reassessment of the data." 

The U.S. Commerce Department reported a $10.77 billion deficit in August, compared with a revised July deficit of $8.24 billion.
Economists had expected a $9.1 billion gap. 

The August figure reflected a 6.4% rise in imports and a 0.2% drop in exports. 

Marc M. Goloven, an economist with Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York, said that while the figures appear to indicate a sadly deteriorating U.S. trade performance, there's still enough positive news in the data to justify buying dollars. 

He said that while the U.S. trade gap with Canada has widened significantly, the trade deficit with Western Europe and Japan continues to narrow.
And he added that manufactured goods exports are still rising. 

The dollar's near-term path remains foggy, according to currencny analysts, who characterize the market as "bewildering." In late New York trading yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8667 marks, down from 1.8685 marks late Monday, and at 142.75 yen, up from 141.85 yen late Monday.
Sterling was unchanged at $1.5753. 

In Tokyo Wednesday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 142.55 yen, unchanged from Tuesday's Tokyo close.
Later, the U.S. currency fell to about 142.25 yen on news reports of the San Francisco earthquake. 

Some analysts remain bullish and point out that the dollar continues to be well bid despite key rate increases in Europe and Japan, several weeks of aggressive dollar sales by the world central banks -- some traders estimate that the barrage of sales topped $12 billion -- and a 190-point plunge on the New York Stock Exchange. 

They note that the U.S. unit is trading at the upper end of the presumed target zones established by the Group of Seven trading partners.
The G-7 comprises West Germany, the U.S., France, the U.K., Italy, Canada and Japan. 

The so-called Louvre accord was seen to have set ranges of 1.70 marks to 1.90 marks and 120 yen to 140 yen. 

They say that the recent injection of liquidity into the U.S. banking system has been modest, and they don't anticipate significant easing by the U.S. Federal Reserve. 

The Fed arranged $1.5 billion of customer repurchase agreements Tuesday, the second repurchase agreement in two days. 

The move, which injects capital into the system, is seen as an effort to reassure the finanicial markets that the U.S. central bank is ready to provide the ample liquidity. 

But other analysts contend that while the Fed's move to loosen credit hasn't been aggressive, it nevertheless sends a clear signal that, at least for now, the Fed has relaxed its grip on credit. 

They add that the Fed has allowed the key federal funds interest rate to dip to about 8 5/8% from its levels of just below 9% last week.
The federal funds rate is the overnight lending rate that banks charge each other. 

Market participants said that the mark continues to post the most significant gains against the dollar. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $367.40 an ounce, up 10 cents.
Estimated volume was a moderate 3.5 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Wednesday, gold was at $366.55 an ounce. 

