.START 

William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., said Lincoln Savings & Loan Association should have been seized by the government in 1986 to contain losses that he estimated will cost taxpayers as much as $2 billion. 

Mr. Seidman, who has been the nation's top bank regulator, inherited the problems of Lincoln, based in Irvine, Calif., after his regulatory role was expanded by the new savings-and-loan bailout law.
He made his comments before House Banking Committee hearings to investigate what appears to be the biggest thrift disaster in a scandal-ridden industry.
The inquiry also will cover the actions of Charles Keating Jr., who is chairman of American Continental Corp., Lincoln's parent, and who contributed heavily to several U.S. senators. 

Mr. Seidman told the committee that the Resolution Trust Corp., the agency created to sell sick thrifts, has studied Lincoln's examination reports by former regulators dating back to 1986. "My staff indicated that had we made such findings in one of our own institutions, we would have sought an immediate cease-and-desist order to stop the hazardous operations," Mr. Seidman said. 

When Lincoln was seized by the government, for example, 15% of its loans, or $250 million, were to borrowers who were buying real estate from one of American Continental's 50 other subsidiaries, according to Mr. Seidman. 

But the government didn't step in until six months ago, when thrift officials put Lincoln into conservatorship -- the day after American Continental filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.
The bankruptcy filing, the government has charged in a $1.1 billion civil lawsuit, was part of a pattern to shift insured deposits to the parent company, which used the deposits as a cache for real-estate deals.
The deposits that have been transferred to other subsidiaries are now under the jurisdiction of the bankruptcy court. "I think it's fairly clear {Mr. Keating} knew," that regulators were set to seize Lincoln, Mr. Seidman said. 

Further investigation, he said, may result in further actions against Lincoln's executives, said Mr. Seidman, "including fraud actions." Mr. Keating, for his part, has filed suit alleging that regulators unlawfully seized the thrift. 

Leonard Bickwit, an attorney in Washington for Mr. Keating, declined to comment on the hearings, except to say, "We will be responding comprehensively in several forums to each of these allegations at the appropriate time." 

Lincoln's treatment by former thrift regulators, in an agency disbanded by the new law, has proved embarrassing for five senators who received thousands of dollars in campaign contributions from Mr. Keating.
Mr. Seidman said yesterday, for example, that Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D., Ariz.), who received $48,100 in contributions from Mr. Keating, phoned Mr. Seidman to request that he push for a sale of Lincoln before it would be seized. 

After the government lawsuit was filed against Lincoln, Sen. DeConcini returned the campaign contributions.
The senator's spokesman said yesterday that he pushed for the sale of Lincoln because "hundreds of Arizona jobs {at Lincoln} were on the line." 

Senate Banking Committee Chairman Donald Riegle (D., Mich.) has also returned contributions he received from Mr. Keating a year ago.
Sens. John Glenn (D., Ohio), John McCain, (R., Ariz.) and Alan Cranston (D., Calif.) also received substantial contributions from Mr. Keating and sought to intervene on behalf of Lincoln. 

House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas) said Sen. Cranston volunteered to appear before the House committee, if necessary.
But a committee staff member said the panel is unlikely to pursue closely the role of the senators. 

At the hearing, Mr. Seidman said the RTC has already pumped $729 million into Lincoln for liquidity.
He also held out little hope of restitution for purchasers of $225 million in American Continental subordinated debt.
Some of those debtholders have filed a suit, saying they believed they were buying government-insured certificates of deposit. "We have no plans at this time to pay off those notes," he said. 

