.START 

Why is the stock market suddenly so volatile? 

Yesterday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average did a now familiar dance: It plunged 60.25 points before lunch, with most of the drop occurring in 25 minutes.
Then, it rebounded to finish down only 18.65 points.
And those swings paled beside Friday's 190.58-point plunge and Monday's 88.12-point recovery. 

"It's madness -- that in an hour you can whack off so much value," says Stanford Calderwood, chairman of Trinity Investment Management Corp., Boston. 

And, apparently, it is here to stay.
Richard Bernstein, senior quantitative analyst at Merrill Lynch & Co, says, "My gut feel is that we'll live with those swings for a while." 

There are many reasons for the market's jumpiness: new trading vehicles such as stock-index futures and options; computer-driven strategies like program trading; and crowd psychology.
But most are linked by a single theme: liquidity -- the ability to get in and out of the market quickly. 

Prices are moving up and down so fast because investors are employing ways to turn over shares at ever-faster rates and increasingly acting in concert. 

"Institutions are herding animals," says Peter Anderson, who heads the pension-fund management arm of IDS Financial Services Inc. "We watch the same indicators and listen to the same prognosticators.
Like lemmings, we tend to move in the same direction at same time." And that, naturally, exacerbates price movements. 

Institutions -- who now account for most trading -- count on being able to buy and sell big blocks of stock at an eye-blink.
But when they discover that markets aren't always as liquid as they supposed -- markets jump. 

On Monday, for instance, Howard Ward, a principal at Scudder, Stevens & Clark, found that "you couldn't buy blue-chips at quoted prices without paying up." And when many firms had to "pay up," Monday's sudden rally was sparked. 

Trading in futures and options, some people believe, can add to volatility.
Investors believe they can can rely on such derivative securities to get in and out of the stock market without actually selling any stocks; that is, a way of staying liquid even when they own stocks. 

These and other modern trading methods "tend to promote dramatic shifts in assets," says George Douglas, first vice president at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. "It's the idea that what goes in easy can come out easy" -- so that bouts of higher volatility get built into the stock market. 

One new investment style called "asset allocation" shifts portfolio weightings between stocks, bonds and cash when computer models say one is more attractive. 

For instance, First Quadrant Corp., an asset allocator based in Morristown, N.J., said it quickly boosted stock positions in its "aggressive" accounts to 75% from 55% to take advantage of plunging prices Friday.
It added another 5% Monday before stocks rallied.
When they did, the firm reduced those stock holdings to about 70%. 

A classic example of institutions' hunger for liquidity is portfolio insurance, now widely discredited.
Before the 1987 crash, an estimated $60 billion in institutional money was managed under this hedging technique.
The idea was to "insure" the value of a portfolio by selling futures when stock prices dropped -- eliminating the need to sell the stocks themselves.
But in October 1987, when portfolio insurers rushed to sell at the same time, they overwhelmed both the stock and futures markets. 

Yet even today, institutions are quietly practicing forms of portfolio insurance by nervously rushing to and fro in the markets.
Others are doing "index arbitrage"a strategy of taking advantage of price discrepancies between stocks and futures. 

Unlike traditional buy-and-hold strategies, all of the above require that market makers be on hand to provide liquidity by buying and selling stocks in a crunch.
But institutions say Wall Street brokerage firms are less willing to make markets. 

Brokers don't deny that.
Wall Street traders say that, with institutional brokerage commissions far lower than in the 1970s, securities firms can't afford to take the risk of buying too much stock. "I think everyone's a little more leery," says Jack Baker, head of equity trading at Shearon Lehman Hutton Inc. "The institutions have driven (commission) rates down to the point where it makes no sense to commit capital," says Tom Gallagher, senior executive vice president in charge of institutional trading at Oppenheimer & Co. "Why should I risk money for a guy for who's paying me five cents a dance?
All you get is risk." 

Lack of liquidity can also result from exchange "reforms." Many traders say that "circuit breakers" put in place to damp volatility after the 1987 crash actually added to volatility when the stock market plunged Friday.
The circuit breakers caused a 30-minute shutdown in trading in Standard & Poor's 500-stock index futures contract as the markets were falling. 

"With the futures-trading halt, you could only sell stocks" to cut exposure to the market, says a money manager. "It was scary to people thinking that they couldn't get their trades off." 

"It was like they put you in a room with a gorilla and told you there were three doors to exit," said one Chicago-based futures trader. "Then they said, `By the way, two of the doors are locked. '" 

The takeover mania also adds to volatility.
UAL Corp. is a good example.
Valued as a buy-out target, the airline stock was trading at nearly $280 a share.
When the deal ran into trouble, the stock tumbled; it closed at $198 yesterday.
Presumably, UAL is now trading closer to its value based on earnings. 

By contrast, traditional buy-and-hold investors are unlikely to generate sudden price moves.
Scott Black, a value-oriented money manager who heads Delphi Management Inc., points out that for those who invest on fundamentals, "the value of a stock from day to day doesn't change all that much." 

Some experts say markets aren't as volatile as widely assumed.
Hans Stoll, finance professor at Vanderbilt University, says the current volatility in U.S. markets pales in comparison to the 1930s, decades before derivative instruments such as options and futures were introduced. "I just can't believe that the innovations in the financial market are causing any of this volatility," he says. 

And Robert D. Arnott, president of asset allocator First Quadrant, notes that before Friday's tailspin, daily volatility on the New York Stock Exchange in recent weeks had reached "historically low levels." 

Some people tend to ignore that a 50-point move is less in percentage terms than it was when the stock market was lower.
John J. Phelan Jr., chairman of the Big Board, asserts that "1988 and 1989 have been two of the least volatile years in the last 30 or 40 years." 

But the low average volatility Mr. Phelan is talking about isn't any comfort in a period of rapid stock-market moves like the past week.
In addition, Sanford Grossman, a Wharton School finance professor, says volatile jumps in stock prices will continue as long as liquidity falls short of the voracious demands of institutions "who can go out and say `I have a billion dollars of stocks to sell. '" 

Some people think the search for liquidity is fruitless.
In 1936, John Maynard Keynes wrote that "of the maxims of orthodox finance none, surely, is more antisocial than the fetish of liquidity." It leads investors to focus on short-term price movements -- "a game of musical chairs," he called it -- rather than on long-term fundamental valuation. 

James A. White contributed to this article. 

