.START 

Reuben Mark, chairman of Colgate-Palmolive Co., said he is "comfortable" with analysts' estimates that third-quarter earnings rose to between 95 cents and $1.05 a share.
That compares with per-share earnings from continuing operations of 69 cents the year earlier; including discontinued operations, per-share was 88 cents a year ago. 

The per-share estimates mean the consumer-products company's net income, increased to between $69.5 million and $76 million, from $47.1 million the year-before period.
Analysts estimate Colgate's world-wide third-quarter sales rose about 8% to $1.29 billion. 

Mr. Mark attributed the earnings growth to strong sales in Latin America, Asia and Europe.
Results were also bolstered by "a very meaningful" increase in operating profit by Colgate's U.S. business, Mr. Mark said. 

Operating profit at Colgate's U.S. household products and personal-care businesses jumped 25% in the quarter, Mr. Mark added.
He said the improvement was a result of cost savings achieved by consolidating manufacturing operations, blending two sales organizations and focusing more carefully the company's promotional activities. 

The estimated improvement in Colgate's U.S. operations took some analysts by surprise.
Colgate's household products business, which includes such brands as Fab laundry detergent and Ajax cleanser, has been a weak performer.
Analysts estimate Colgate's sales of household products in the U.S. were flat for the quarter, and they estimated operating margins at only 1% to 3%. "If you could say their business in the U.S. was mediocre, but great everywhere else, that would be fine," says Bonita Austin, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co. "But it's not mediocre, it's a real problem." 

Mr. Mark conceded that Colgate's domestic business, apart from its highly profitable Hill's Pet Products unit, has lagged. "We've done a lot to improve {U.S.} results, and a lot more will be done," Mr. Mark said. "Improving profitability of U.S. operations is an extremely high priority in the company." 

To focus on its global consumer-products business, Colgate sold its Kendall health-care business in 1988. 

