.START 

The days may be numbered for animated shows featuring Alf, the Karate Kid and the Chipmunks. 

NBC, a leader in morning, prime-time and late night programs but an also-ran on Saturday mornings, when children rule the TV set, is contemplating getting out of the cartoon business.
Instead, network officials say, it may "counterprogram" with shows for an audience that is virtually ignored in that time period: adults. 

"There is talk of some revamping and we're certainly heading in the direction of less and less animation," said Joseph S. Cicero, vice president of finance and administration for National Broadcasting Co., a unit of General Electric Co. 

Mr. Cicero said that NBC Entertainment president Brandon Tartikoff, who declined to be interviewed, is "looking at options now and may put some things into the schedule by mid-season." He declined to elaborate. 

NBC's options could range from news-oriented programming to sports shows, although the network declined to comment. 

One major NBC affiliate, KCRA in Sacramento, plans to cancel the NBC Saturday morning line-up as of January and replace it with a local newscast.
The one-hour program will be repeated with updates throughout Saturday mornings. 

"We feel there is an opportunity for an audience that is not being served by any network, so we want to take the lead," says KCRA's general manager, John Kueneke. "We don't need cartoons anymore.
They only accounted for 5%, at best, of the station's total revenues." 

An NBC spokesman says the network will "closely monitor" the Sacramento situation, and says it is the only station to defect.
Spokesmen for the television networks of CBS Inc. and Capital Cities/ABC Inc., say there are no plans to alter the children's line-up on Saturday mornings. 

The youthful audience for Saturday programming is no longer dependent on the networks.
There has been a surge in syndicated children's shows to independent stations, as well as competition from videocassettes for kids and from cable outlets such as Nickelodeon and the Disney Channel. 

At the same time, there appears to be a market for news-oriented programming; Turner Broadcasting System Inc. 's Cable News Network has its highest ratings, outside of prime time, on Saturday mornings. 

NBC has on previous occasions considered replacing cartoons with a Saturday version of "Today," which is produced by NBC News.
The network's own production company, NBC Productions, supplies a half-hour family-oriented show titled "Saved By The Bell." NBC Productions or NBC News could supply the network with other Saturday morning shows, a move that would control costs.
Animated shows, which are made by outside production companies, cost the network about $300,000 per episode. 

