.START 

Certainly conservative environmentalists can defend their limited government position by differentiating between Old Environmentalism and New Environmentalism ("Journalists and Others for Saving the Planet," by David Brooks, editorial page, Oct. 5). 

Old Environmentalism involved microbe hunters and sanitationists.
It started with improvements in hygiene made possible by affordable soap and washable underwear during the Industrial Revolution.
Then cast-iron sewer pipe and the flush toilet were followed by sewage- and water-treatment plants toward the end of the 19th century.
Medicine in the 19th century was dedicated mostly to combating sepsis and diagnostic analysis.
Then the 20th century saw the evolution of private-sector wonder drugs, which promulgated medical therapy.
The process dramatically increased our average life expectancy, eliminated much pain and constantly improved health and well-being.
Most public-health measures were handled at the local level. 

New Environmentalism probably started in 1962 with the publication of Rachel Carson's book "Silent Spring." Shortly thereafter, hysterical articles began to appear predicting that advanced industrial societies would produce a blackened, uninhabitable planet possibly by the turn of the century.
These apocalyptic predictions were advanced by such stalwarts as Paul Ehrlich, Barry Commoner, Rene Dubois and George Wald.
Writing in the 1960s Ms. Carson suggested that the human race could be eliminated in 20 years, and Mr. Wald suggested that life on earth might end by 1985.
Mr. Ehrlich predicted unprecedented famine by 1980.
There were many more.
Thousands of chemical products were categorized as carcinogenic, with recommendations that they be banned from industrial use because they produced malignant tumors in overdosed rats.
Unknown before 1960 were the inconclusive effects of acid rain, greenhouse warming and ozone depletion, all of which required burgeoning political power and gargantuan expense. 

Meanwhile, the New Environmentalists systematically opposed the methods of the Old Environmentalists.
Local pollution problems require cheap energy and capital for their solution.
But the New Environmentalists oppose private wealth creation (which, they claim, depletes natural resources) and nuclear power (even though it would counteract the greenhouse effect).
They are in the forefront of opposing the search for new landfills and methods of incineration and even oppose new methods of research such as genetic engineering. 

New Environmentalism is an emotional attack on proven methods of improving our quality of life and a bid for political power.
Let's rationalize our priorities by solving pollution problems at the local level as heretofore. 

Harry Lee Smith 

Alpharetta, Ga. 

Your story missed some essential points of the conference on "The Global Environment: Are We Overreacting?" 

First and foremost, the vignettes presented by the various scientists represent a general consensus among specialists working in the respective aspects of the global environment.
Consider, for example, the greenhouse effect and climate change; numerous blue-ribbon scientific committees, including one from the National Academy of Science, judge there is a greater than 50% probability of a grave problem in the offing. 

The point was to answer the question in the conference title, not to try to create news stories for the event itself.
Nor was it intended to dictate a set of prescriptive solutions, although various points were raised.
Each speaker was asked to address a specific topic, not deliver a point of view.
Each scientist independently concluded society and government are underreacting when it comes to substantive policy change.
This leads to a very special sense of urgency.
If the media decide to work harder at educating the public about these complex and technical issues, that hardly can be termed non-objective journalism. 

The environment can no longer be a normal issue, to be dealt with on a business-as-usual basis with comfortable increments of change.
We have literally altered the chemistry and physics of our planet's atmosphere.
This portends consequences from what we have already done that will be very destabilizing to social and economic systems.
The problems of the environment are so interrelated, so inextricably entwined with our current way of life and so large that it is unlikely we will be able to address them effectively unless major changes are made in less than 10 years.
The consensus from the scientific community is that there is sufficient evidence to advise major policy changes.
No, we are not overreacting. 

Thomas E. Lovejoy 

Assistant Secretary for External Affairs 

Smithsonian Institution 

Washington 

