.START 

Bearings Inc. said its chairman, John R. Cunin, will retire as an officer of the company on Jan. 2. 

George L. LaMore, president and chief executive officer, will become chairman and chief executive upon Mr. Cunin's retirement.
John C. Dannemiller, executive vice president and chief operating officer, will become president and chief operating officer. 

Mr. Cunin, 65 years old, was chief executive of the distributor of bearings and power-transmission products from 1982 to 1988.
He will continue as a director. 

Mr. LaMore, 63, a 48-year veteran at Bearings, has been president since 1983.
Mr. Dannemiller, 51, joined Bearings in August 1988 from Leaseway Transportation Corp., where he was president and chief operating officer.
He has been a Bearings director since 1985. 

The appointments are part of a planned succession at the company. 

Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev opened a major U.S. trade exhibition in Moscow and spent two hours touring some of the 150 stalls representing such blue-chip companies as General Motors Corp., International Business Machines Corp. and Johnson & Johnson.
At the Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. stand, Mrs. Nelson Rockefeller, a board member, offered him a soy burger.
He didn't bite. 

The exhibition by the U.S.-U.S.S.R.
Trade and Economic Council underscores the growing U.S. interest in that nation's market, though trade between the two countries is a minuscule $3 billion. 

The Soviet president and his prime minister, Nikolai Ryzhkov, spent the longest time, about 15 minutes, at the IBM stand, where they got souvenir computer-chip key rings.
At the GM stall, they barely looked at a gleaming Cadillac, preferring to talk about cooperation possibilities. 

In Beijing, meantime, China opened an international aviation show, but the West's embargo on military deals and uncertainty about the nation's stability kept many foreign exhibitors away.
Officials said 91 companies from 14 countries, including the U.S., had displays, down from about 260 firms from more than 20 countries at the last show in 

Japanese air-conditioner maker Daikin Industries Ltd. was fined two million yen ($14,000) for exporting to the Soviet Union a chemical solution that could be used in missile-guidance systems.
A Daikin executive in charge of exports when the high-purity halogenated hydrocarbon was sold to the Soviets in 1986 received a suspended 10-month jail sentence.
Judge Masaaki Yoneyama told the Osaka District Court Daikin's "responsibility is heavy because Õillegal exportså lowered international trust in Japan." Sale of the solution in concentrated form to Communist countries is prohibited by Japanese law and by international agreement. 

A Soviet legislative panel rejected as not radical enough a government proposal on decentralizing economic control.
The newspaper Leninskoye Zamya said the committee decided the plan to parcel out economic powers previously exercised by Moscow to the country's 15 republics "doesn't reflect the radical changes in the Soviet federation." The committee gave the government until Nov. 15 to revise the proposal.
The move reflected the growing confidence of the revamped Supreme Soviet. 

Scott Paper Co. said it is abandoning a proposed $650 million tree-farming project in Indonesia because it no longer expects to use as much eucalyptus pulp as previously anticipated.
The eucalyptus plantation and pulp mill, which would have covered about 175,000 acres in the Irian Jaya region, had been approved by Indonesia's investment board.
But it was opposed by some environmentalists as a threat to Irian Jaya's forests and a potential source of social unrest for the primitive tribes who inhabit them. 

Yaohan Departmentstore Co. of Japan is moving its international-operations headquarters and holding company to Hong Kong to gain from the British colony's economic advantages and tax structure.
With funds of 5.56 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$712 million), the new company, Yaohan International Co., plans to acquire 10 of Hong Kong's top restaurants.
It also intends to set up an international wholesale market with the Singapore government next May and to open a department store in Bangkok and shopping centers in Malaysia, Taiwan, Canada, Chicago and Seattle by December 1990.
The chain currently has 90 retail outlets in Japan, seven in the U.S., three in Hong Kong and a dozen more scattered around the globe. 

Major European auction houses are turning increasingly to specialized sales. 

Christie's will soon have a sale of Dada and Symbolist art while Sotheby's is luring collectors with sales of Swiss, German, Spanish, Australian and Canadian paintings.
In Brussels, Hotel de Ventes Horta auctioned pistols and sabers-along with paintings and jewels. 

Berlin's Villa Grisebach will auction art works with pre-sale estimates of less than $1,600 on Nov. 25.
The auction house, known for its sales of top-drawer 19th and 20th century works, is providing "a service to clients who don't want to sell just their fabulous oil paintings," says Villa Grisebach's Vivien Reuter. 

Antwerp auctioneer Campo is less concerned with market niches than with Belgium's crushing tax and auction-fee burden. "Everything has to be the same between countries," says Campo's Stefan Campo, who is asking clients to sign protest petitions. "Then there'll be fair competition." 

Ending tax-free shopping in the European Community after 1992 could threaten more than 3,000 jobs, the International Duty Free Confederation said.
Instead of banning such shopping, the confederation proposed amending controls to be sure the privilege isn't abused. . . . British and Argentine diplomats opened talks in Madrid aimed at restoring ties severed because of their 1982 war over the Falkland Islands.
Britain's U.N. representative and delegation head Crispin Tickell called the first meeting "good, interesting and businesslike." 

