.START 

Microsoft Corp. 's earnings growth continued to outstrip that of most of its competitors and customers in the personal-computer industry, as it reported a 36% jump in fiscal first-quarter earnings on a 33% revenue gain. 

The Redmond, Wash. company, a bellwether provider of operating systems and software for personal-computer makers and users, reported net income for the quarter ended Sept. 30 of $49.6 million, or 87 cents a share, up from $36.6 million, or 65 cents a share, in the year-ago period.
Revenue rose to $235.2 million, from $176.4 million. 

Microsoft previously indicated it would have a strong quarter by forecasting its revenue gain on Oct. 4, causing a $6.50 a share jump in its stock.
But its stock jumped again yesterday as it disclosed surprisingly strong margins on those sales. 

Microsoft's stock rose $2.875 a share in national over-the-counter trading to $78.625.
The stock had hit a high of $81 a share early last week but collapsed to $73.50 in the Friday stock plunge. 

The company had been experiencing softening margins because of increased sales of software applications, which have lower margins than do operating systems.
But the company said that trend was offset in the first quarter by better economies of scale and efficiencies in manufacturing. 

As a result, Microsoft's cost of goods, as a percentage of sales, fell 17% from the year-ago quarter and 13% from the previous period.
The trend drove up the aftertax margin -- net income as a percentage of revenues -- to 21.1% in the quarter, compared with 20.7% a year earlier. 

Microsoft officials said the strong results also reflected continuing high demand for its software applications and operating systems.
While it has predicted that overall growth in unit sales of personal computers is slowing to about a 10% yearly rate, its own products are selling at a much faster rate because many are geared to the high-performance end of the market.
That segment continues to post strong quarter-to-quarter gains, while the low-end, or commodity segment, of the industry is experiencing sluggish growth or even sales declines. 

Compared with its previous quarter, the final period of its 1989 fiscal year, net rose 9%, and sales rose 7%. 

