.START 

The oil and auto industries, united in their dislike of President Bush's proposal for cars that run on alternative fuels, announced a joint research program that could turn up a cleaner-burning gasoline. 

Officials of the Big Three auto makers and 14 petroleum companies said they are setting out to find the most cost-effective fuel for reducing cities' air-pollution problems, with no bias toward any fuel in particular. 

However, their search notably won't include natural gas or pure methanol -- the two front-running alternative fuels -- in tests to be completed by next summer.
Instead, the tests will focus heavily on new blends of gasoline, which are still undeveloped but which the petroleum industry has been touting as a solution for automobile pollution that is choking urban areas. 

Environmentalists criticized the program as merely a public-relations attempt to head off a White House proposal to require a million cars a year that run on cleaner-burning fuels by 1997. 

While major oil companies have been experimenting with cleaner-burning gasoline blends for years, only Atlantic Richfield Co. is now marketing a lower-emission gasoline for older cars currently running on leaded fuel.
The initial $11 million research program will conduct the most extensive testing to date of reformulated gasolines, said Joe Colucci, head of fuels and lubricants at General Motors Corp. research laboratories.
It will compare 21 different blends of gasolines with three mixtures of up to 85% methanol. 

A second phase of research, which is still being planned, will test reformulated gasolines on newer engine technologies now being developed for use in 1992 or 1993 cars.
There was no cost estimate for the second phase. 

"The whole idea here is the automobile and oil companies have joint customers," said Keith McHenry, a senior vice president of technology at Amoco Corp. "And we are looking for the most cost-effective way to clean up the air." 

But David Hawkins, an environmental lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council, said the research appears merely to be a way to promote reformulated gasoline. 

Oil and auto companies supported a move on Capitol Hill last week to gut Mr. Bush's plans to require auto makers to begin selling alternative-fueled cars by 1995.
Instead, a House subcommittee adopted a clean-fuels program that specifically mentions reformulated gasoline as an alternative.
The Bush administration has said it will try to resurrect its plan when the House Energy and Commerce Committee takes up a comprehensive clean-air bill. 

