.START 

Markets usually get noticed because they soar or plunge.
Gold, which hasn't risen or fallen significantly in quite some time, yesterday achieved what may be a new level of impassiveness: The most actively traded futures contracts closed unchanged despite nervous fluctuations in both the dollar and the stock market. 

The settlement prices of the December, February and April gold contracts were even with Monday's final prices.
The December 1989 contract, which has the greatest trading volume, ended at $371.20 an ounce.
The other months posted advances of 10 cents to 20 cents an ounce. 

According to one analyst, Bernard Savaiko of PaineWebber, New York, the stock market's ability on Monday to rally from last Friday's decline -- which seemed to indicate that the economy wasn't going to fall either -- took the starch out of precious metals prices, and out of gold's, in particular. 

Yesterday, gold traded within a narrow range.
Gold tried to rally on Monday but ran into the same situation that has subdued gold prices for more than a year: selling by gold producers, who want to fix the highest possible price for their gold. 

"December delivery gold is trading in a range of $365 to $375 {an ounce} and is having difficulty breaking out above that," Mr. Savaiko said. "Producers at the moment regard that area a good one in which to sell gold." 

Also, Mr. Savaiko noted, stock market investors seeking greater safety are veering toward buying bonds rather than precious metals because "we are tending more toward a disinflationary economy that doesn't make gold and precious metals attractive." 

Jeffrey Nichols, president of APMS Canada, Toronto precious metals advisers, said there is little to motivate gold traders to buy the metal. "Investors in the U.S. and Europe are comfortable with the actions of the {Federal Reserve} in its willingness to supply liquidity to financial system, which helped the stock market rebound on Monday," he said. 

There isn't any rush on the part of investors in the West to buy gold, he said. "They still bear the memory of October 1987, when they bought gold after the stock market crashed and ended up losing money because gold prices subsequently fell," Mr. Nichols said. "It's an experience they don't want to repeat." 

At the moment gold traders aren't concerned about inflation, he said, and as for the dollar, "gold's association with the currency has been diminishing recently so drops in the currency aren't having much impact on gold." 

Dinsa Mehta, chief bullion trader for Chase Manhattan Bank, said: "There is little incentive on the part of traders to sell gold because the stock market may go lower and gold may retain some of its `flight to safety' quality.
There is little incentive to buy gold because if the stock market goes higher, it may be just a false alarm.
This is keeping the gold traders handcuffed." 

The most remarkable feature about yesterday's action was that the price of roughly $370 an ounce was regarded as attractive enough by gold producers around the world to aggressively sell gold, Mr. Mehta said. 

"I don't know what it means over the long run, but for the short term, it appears that gold producers are grateful for the $10 or so that gold has risen over the past week or so," he said. 

Previously, he noted, gold producers tended to back off from a rising gold market, letting prices rise as much as possible before selling. 

Mr. Mehta observed that the U.S. merchandise trade deficit, which rose sharply in August, according to yesterday's report, has been having less and less impact on the gold market. "The dollar hasn't reacted much to it, so gold hasn't either," he said. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Crude oil prices rose slightly in lackluster activity as traders in the pits tried to assess action in the stock market.
Since stock market indexes plummeted last Friday, participants in all markets have been wary.
When traders become confident that the stock market has stabilized, oil prices are expected to rise as supply and demand fundamentals once again become the major consideration.
Crude oil for November delivery edged up by 16 cents a barrel to $20.75 a barrel.
Heating oil prices also rose.
November gasoline slipped slightly. 

SUGAR: Futures prices rose on a report that Cuba may seek to postpone some sugar shipments.
The March contract advanced 0.14 cent a pound to 14.11 cents.
According to an analyst, Cuba can't meet all its shipment commitments and has asked Japan to accept a delay of shipments scheduled for later this year, into early next year. "Japan is perceived as a wealthy nation that can turn elsewhere in the world market and buy the sugar," the analyst said.
It was the possibility of this demand that helped firm prices, the analyst said.
Another analyst noted that Cuba has been deferring shipments in recent years. "To the professionals in the trade it didn't cause much surprise.
The March futures contract traded as high as 14.24 cents, but couldn't sustain the advance," he said. 

LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: The prices of cattle, hogs and pork belly futures contracts rebounded as livestock traders shook off fears that the Friday stock market plunge would chill consumer spending, which in turn would hurt retail sales of beef and pork.
The prices of most livestock futures contracts had dropped sharply Monday.
Cattle futures prices were also supported yesterday by signs that supermarket chains are making plans to increase their promotions concerning beef. 

GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: The prices of most soybean and soybean-meal futures contracts rose amid rumors that the Soviet Union is interested in buying from the U.S. or South America about 250,000 metric tons of soybeans and as many as 400,000 metric tons of soybean meal.
Traders are especially sensitive to reports of possible U.S. soybean sales because U.S. exports are lagging.
Since Sept. 1, about 13 million fewer bushels of U.S. soybeans have been sold overseas than for the same period last year.
Corn futures prices rose slightly while wheat prices settled mixed. 

