.START 

Banks are continuing to go after individual investors, despite falling interest rates. 

Yields on small-denomination certificates of deposit fell at about half the rate of so-called jumbo CDs this week, according to Banxquote Money Markets, an information service based here.
Investors can get slightly higher yields on deposits below $50,000 than they can on deposits of $90,000 and up. 

"Banks want to remain competitive," said Norberto Mehl, chairman of Banxquote. "October is a big rollover month and perhaps they anticipate greater demand . . . among people leaving the stock market." 

Some bankers are reporting more inquiries than usual about CDs since Friday. "Reports from branches are that there has been greater interest in the last day or so," said Steven Braitman, a vice president at Chemical Bank in New York.
Chemical said deposits Monday were about $5 million higher than usual and it expects more activity as investors receive the proceeds from sales of stock. 

"This is no time to be playing in the street . . . the Dow has more ups and downs than an elevator," proclaimed an advertisement Monday in New York newspapers, touting Lincoln Savings Bank's one-year CD. Harold Jones, Lincoln's chief retail banking officer, said there hasn't yet been "a discernible response," although the ad included a coupon that could arrive later in the week. 

Friday's market rout came smack in the middle of the heaviest month for CD rollovers, when a number of banks and thrifts already have promotions under way.
First National Bank of Boston, for example, is offering certain new depositors an extra quarter of a percentage point on six-month and 12-month CDs. 

Some banks actually boosted yields on the shortest term CDs in the latest week.
New York's Citibank, for instance, increased the yield on small-denomination three-month CDs to 8% from 7.9%.
On average, however, three-month CDs at major banks are yielding a tenth of a percentage point less than they were a week ago. 

Average yields on CDs aimed at individual investors fell less than half as much as yields on Treasury bills sold at Monday's auction.
Six-month CDs of $50,000 and less yielded an average 8.02% in the week ended Tuesday, down from 8.10%, according to Banxquote.
The yield on six-month T-bills fell to 7.82% on Monday, from 8.01% the week before. 

Meanwhile, the average yield on six-month CDs of more than $90,000 fell to 7.93% in the latest week, according to Banxquote, from 8.10% the week before.
Mr. Mehl noted that actual rates are almost identical on small and large-denomination CDs, but yields on CDs aimed at the individual investor are boosted by more frequent compounding. 

CDs sold by major brokerage houses, which like jumbo CDs tend to closely follow interest rate trends, also posted larger drops in yields.
A six-month, broker-sold CD, for example, was yielding an average 8.09% in the latest week, a fifth of a percentage point lower than the week before.
In late April, when interest rates were at their recent highs, short-term CDs sold by brokers were offering yields half a percentage point or more higher than banks. 

CD yields are generally expected to fall further in coming weeks. "What happened in the stock market and the bigger trade deficit" reported yesterday "make it unlikely that short-term interest rates will rise" any time soon, said Mr. Mehl of Banxquote. 

"Even before the market drop, rates were down about half a percentage point," said Robert J. Hutchinson, senior vice president for retail marketing at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. in New York. "That puts pressure on CD rates." 

