.START 

Three leading drug companies reported robust third-quarter earnings, bolstered by strong sales of newer, big-selling prescriptions drugs that provide hefty profit margins. 

Merck & Co. reported a 25% increase in earnings; Warner-Lambert Co. 's profit rose 22% and Eli Lilly & Co. 's net income rose 24%.
The results were in line with analysts' expectations. 

Merck & Co. 

Merck, Rahway, N.J., continued to lead the industry with a strong sales performance in the human and animal health-products segment.
A stronger U.S. dollar reduced third-quarter and first-nine-month sales growth 2% and 3%, respectively.
International sales accounted for 47% of total company sales for the nine months, compared with 50% a year earlier.
Sales for the quarter rose to $1.63 billion from $1.47 billion. 

Mevacor, Merck's new cholesterol-lowering drug, had higher sales than any other prescription medicine has ever achieved in the U.S. in the year following introduction, the company said.
The drug was introduced in West Germany this year.
Intense competition, however, led to unit sales declines for a group of Merck's established human and animal-health products, including Aldomet and Indocin. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Merck shares closed at $75.25, up 50 cents. 

Warner-Lambert Co. 

Warner-Lambert, Morris Plains, N.J., reported sales that were a record for any quarter and the eighth quarter in a row of 20% or more per-share earnings growth.
Spurred by growth in world-wide sales of the company's prescription drugs, Warner-Lambert said 1989 will be the best year in its history, with per-share earnings expected to increase more than 20% to about $6.10.
Sales for the quarter rose to $1.11 billion from $1.03 billion. 

Prescription-drug world-wide sales rose 9% in the quarter to $340 million; U.S. sales rose 15%.
The segment's growth was led by sales of the cardiovascular drugs Lopid, a lipid regulator, and Dilzem, a calcium channel blocker. 

World-wide sales of Warner-Lambert's non-prescription health-care products, such as Halls cough tablets, Rolaids antacid, and Lubriderm skin lotion, increased 3% to $362 million in the third quarter; U.S. sales rose 5%. 

Confectionery products sales also had strong growth in the quarter.
World-wide sales of Trident gum, Certs breath mints, and Clorets gum and breath mints, increased 12% to $277 million. 

Warner-Lambert shares closed at $109.50 a share, up $1.50, in Big Board composite trading yesterday. 

Eli Lilly & Co. 

Lilly attributed record third-quarter and nine-month results to world-wide gains for pharmaceuticals, medical instruments and plant-science products despite poor exchange rates for the dollar that slowed sales abroad. 

Earnings continued to pace sales because of a lower tax rate, profit from the renegotiation of the debt instrument received from Faberge Inc. in connection with Lilly's sale of Elizabeth Arden Inc. in 1987, and net proceeds from the settlement of patent litigation at Lilly's Hybritech Inc. unit. 

Third-quarter sales of the Indianapolis, Ind., company rose 11% to $1.045 billion from $940.6 million.
Nine-month sales grew 12% to $3.39 billion from $3.03 billion a year earlier. 

Sales of Prozac, an anti-depressant, led drug-sales increases.
Higher sales of pesticides and other plant-science products more than offset a slight decline in the sales of animal-health products to fuel the increase in world-wide agricultural product sales, Lilly said. 

Advanced Cardiovascular Systems Inc. and Cardiac Pacemakers Inc. units led growth in the medical-instrument systems division. 

Lilly shares closed yesterday in composite trading on the Big Board at $62.25, down 12.5 cents. 

