.START 

When the Soviets announced their last soldier had left Afghanistan in February, the voices of skepticism were all but drowned out by an international chorus of euphoria.
It was "the Soviets' Vietnam." The Kabul regime would fall.
Millions of refugees would rush home.
A resistance government would walk into Kabul.
Those who bought that illusion are now bewildered.
Eight months after Gen. Boris Gromov walked across the bridge into the U.S.S.R., a Soviet-controlled regime remains in Kabul, the refugees sit in their camps, and the restoration of Afghan freedom seems as far off as ever. 

But there never was a chance that the Afghan resistance would overthrow the Kabul regime quickly and easily.
Soviet leaders said they would support their Kabul clients by all means necessary -- and did.
The U.S. said it would fully support the resistance -- and didn't. 

With the February 1987 U.N. accords "relating to Afghanistan," the Soviet Union got everything it needed to consolidate permanent control.
The terms of the Geneva accords leave Moscow free to provide its clients in Kabul with assistance of any kind -- including the return of Soviet ground forces -- while requiring the U.S. and Pakistan to cut off aid.
The only fly in the Soviet ointment was the last-minute addition of a unilateral American caveat, that U.S. aid to the resistance would continue as long as Soviet aid to Kabul did.
But as soon as the accords were signed, American officials sharply reduced aid.
In February 1989, when the Soviets said they had completed their pullout, the U.S. cut it further. 

Not so the Soviets.
Gen. Gromov himself said Soviet troops expected to leave behind more than $1 billion of military equipment and installations for the Kabul regime.
Since the troop withdrawal, Moscow has poured in an additional $200 to $300 million worth per month -- nearly $2 billion since February, equivalent to the total U.S. aid to the resistance in nine years.
This includes what Deputy Foreign Minister Yuli Vorontsov fetchingly called "new peaceful long-range weapons," including more than 800 SCUD missiles.
By early May, Moscow had delivered, for example, 1,000 trucks, about 100 tanks, artillery and hundreds of other combat vehicles.
Later that month, it added an entire tank brigade, including 120 T-72 tanks and more than 40 BMP state-of-the-art infantry fighting vehicles.
By September, a new Reinforced Motorized Rifle Brigade with an additional 300 combat vehicles, 1,000 more trucks and 10,000 Soviet-trained Afghan troops had arrived in Kandahar.
In the last few weeks, Moscow has added FROG-7B missiles, the bomber version of the An-12, MiG-23BN high-altitude aircraft, MiG-29s, which can outfly Pakistan's U.S.-built F16s, and Sukhoi SU-27 fighter-bombers, which can outfly the MiG-29s. 

Moscow claims this is all needed to protect the Kabul regime against the guerrilla resistance.
It is well-known that the regular Afghan infantry is filled with reluctant conscripts.
But this is not the entire Afghan army, and it is no longer Kabul's only military force.
Complete units have been trained and indoctrinated in the U.S.S.R. and other East bloc nations; 30,000 to 40,000 of these troops have returned. 

In addition, the regime has established well-paid paramilitary forces totaling more than 100,000, including 35,000 Soviet-trained troops of the Interior Ministry (KHAD/WAD), which still is directed by 1,500 Soviet KGB officers.
Even if not all these forces are committed to the regime, they are now dependent on it.
And thousands of Afghan children have been taken to the Soviet Union, where they are hostage for the behavior of their families. 

Since 1981, Indian military advisers have been assisting the Kabul regime.
In preparation for the withdrawal, Moscow, Kabul and New Delhi signed two agreements for several hundred newly civilian Indian experts to replace some of the more visible Soviet military personnel.
Cuban military personnel also have been active in Afghanistan since 1979.
The Soviets cut a deal with Iran: a future Iranian role in Afghanistan in exchange for Iranian support of Soviet policy.
The deal was symbolized by the restoration of the Shi'ite Sultan Ali Keshtmand to the Afghan prime ministry. 

Moreover, serious questions have been raised about the claimed withdrawal of Soviet forces.
Before his assassination in 1988, President Zia of Pakistan repeatedly stated that fresh Soviet troops were being inserted into Afghanistan even as others were ostentatiously withdrawn.
Rep. Bill McCollum (R., Fla.) reports that these included 20,000 to 30,000 Soviet Central Asian KGB Border Guards, ethnically indistinguishable from Afghans and wearing unmarked uniforms. 

Meanwhile, the Kabul regime is increasingly successful at portraying the resistance as bloody-minded fanatics.
In this they are aided by years of American, European, Pakistani and Saudi support for the most extreme factions -- radical Islamic fanatics with leaders whose policies are anathema to the Afghan public.
This heavy outside support for the worst has undermined better, moderate leaders. 

In autumn last year, for example, the regime garrison at Kandahar was prepared to surrender the city to resistance moderates.
At the last minute, however, Pakistani officials sent in Gulbuddin Hekhmatyar, perhaps the most hated and feared of the extremists, with a demand that the surrender be made to his forces.
The deal fell through, and Kandahar remains a major regime base. 

The resistance lacks not only air power, armor and expertise but often such essentials as maps, mine detectors, or even winter gloves.
Experienced resistance commanders wanted to use guerrilla action and siege tactics to wear down the regime.
Instead, they were pressured by Pakistan's ISI, the channel for their support, into attacking Jalalabad.
They took more than 25% casualties; journalists report that they faced minefields without mine detectors.
The wonder is not that the resistance has failed to topple the Kabul regime, but that it continues to exist and fight at all. 

Last summer, in response to congressional criticism, the State Department and the CIA said they had resumed military aid to the resistance months after it was cut off; but it is not clear how much is being sent or when it will arrive.
For months the resistance has been defenseless against air attack.
Thus far there is no indication that they have been re-supplied with Stingers or other anti-aircraft weapons.
Indeed, U.S. officials have indicated to the press that the continuation of aid depends on what success the weakened resistance achieves by the end of this year.
Moscow and Kabul must have found that information useful. 

For a decade U.S. policy has been incoherent, based on miscalculation and the defense of bureaucratic and political turf.
No settlement negotiated by others can force the Afghan people to give up their struggle.
A cutoff of U.S. military aid would merely abandon them to die in vain.
Creation of a new, realistic U.S. policy is long overdue. 

Ms. Klass, editor and co-author of "Afghanistan: The Great Game Revisited" (Freedom House), directs the Freedom House program on Afghanistan/Southwest Asia. 

