.START 

When Maj. Moises Giroldi, the leader of the abortive coup in Panama, was buried, his body bore several gunshot wounds, a cracked skull and broken legs and ribs.
They were the signature of his adversary, Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio Noriega. 

The rebel officer's slow and painful death, at the headquarters of Panama's Battalion-2000 squad, was personally supervised by Gen. Noriega, says a U.S. official with access to intelligence reports.
Leaping into rages, sinking into bouts of drunkenness and mistrust, Mr. Noriega has put to death some 70 of his troops involved in the coup, according to U.S. officials monitoring crematoriums and funeral parlors in Panama City. 

He is now changing the place he sleeps every night, sometimes more than once a night.
His meals are most often prepared by women he trusts -- his full-time mistress, Vicky Amado, and her mother, Norma.
And he is collecting the names of those who telephoned the coup-makers to congratulate them during their brief time in control of his headquarters.
More enemies to be dealt with. 

In the two weeks since the rebellion, which the U.S. hesitantly backed, Mr. Noriega has been at his most brutal-and efficient-in maintaining power.
Yet, while the failed coup is a major U.S. foreign policy embarrassment, it is merely the latest chapter in a byzantine relationship between Mr. Noriega and Washington that stretches back three decades.
America's war on the dictator over the past two years, following his indictment on drug charges in February 1988, is the legacy of that relationship.
Before American foreign policy set out to destroy Noriega, it helped create him out of the crucible of Panama's long history of conspirators and pirates. 

For most of the past 30 years, the marriage was one of convenience.
In 1960, for example, when Mr. Noriega was both a cadet at an elite military academy in Peru and a spy-in-training for the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, he was detained by Lima authorities for allegedly raping and savagely beating a prostitute, according to a U.S. Embassy cable from that period.
The woman had nearly died.
But U.S. intelligence, rather than rein in or cut loose its new spy, merely filed the report away.
Mr. Noriega's tips on emerging leftists at his school were deemed more important to U.S. interests.
From that point on, the U.S. would make a practice of overlooking the Panamanian's misadventures. 

The U.S. has befriended and later turned against many dictators, but none quite so resourceful.
The 55-year-old Mr. Noriega isn't as smooth as the shah of Iran, as well-born as Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza, as imperial as Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines or as bloody as Haiti's Baby Doc Duvalier.
Yet he has proved more resilient than any of them.
And out of necessity: The U.S. can make mistakes and still hope to remove him from power, but a single error on his part could cost him his life. 

"The U.S. underestimated Noriega all along," says Ambler Moss, a former Ambassador to Panama. "He has mastered the art of survival." 

In keeping with America's long history of propping up Mr. Noriega, recent U.S. actions have extended rather than shortened his survival.
Mr. Noriega might have fallen of his own weight in 1988 because of Panama's dire economic situation, says Mr. Moss, but increasing external pressure has only given him additional excuses for repression, and a scapegoat for his own mismanagement. 

"If the U.S. had sat back and done nothing, he might not have made it through 1988," Mr. Moss contends. 

Perhaps most important, Mr. Noriega's allies have intervened to encourage -- in some cases, to demand -- that the dictator maintain his grip of the throne.
One Colombian drug boss, upon hearing in 1987 that Gen. Noriega was negotiating with the U.S. to abandon his command for a comfortable exile, sent him a hand-sized mahogany coffin engraved with his name. 

"He is cornered," says the Rev. Fernando Guardia, who has led Catholic Church opposition against Noriega. "The Americans have left him without a way out.
It is easy to fight when you don't have any other option." 

His chief advantage in the fight: his intimate knowledge of American ways and weaknesses.
Mr. Noriega often tells friends that patience is the best weapon against the gringos, who have a short attention span and little stomach for lasting confrontation. 

The U.S. discovered the young Tony Noriega in late 1959, when he was in his second year at the Chorrillos Military Academy in Lima, according to former U.S. intelligence officials.
The contact occurred through Mr. Noriega's half-brother, a Panamanian diplomat based in Peru named Luis Carlos Noriega Hurtado.
Luis Carlos, knowing that helping the Americans could advance the career of any Panamanian officer, relayed Tony's reports on the leftist tendencies he observed among his fellow students and, more important, among his officers and instructors.
A spy was born. 

It was a heady experience for the pockmarked and slightly built Mr. Noriega, who was known to his friends as Cara la Pina -- pineapple face.
Born the illegitimate son of his father's maid, he was raised on the mean streets of the central market district of Panama City.
Tony was four years older than most of his fellow cadets, and gained admission to the academy because his brother had falsified his birth certificate.
He considered himself intellectually superior to his Peruvian peers, many of whom were wayward sons sent by their well-off families to the highly disciplined, French-modeled academy as a sort of reform school. 

In his peaked military cap and neatly pressed, French-made uniform, Noriega felt more respected and powerful than ever in his underprivileged life, friends from the period say. "He had an elegant uniform with gold buttons in a country where there was a cult of militarism, where officers were the elite with special privileges," recalls Darien Ayala, a fellow student in Peru and a lifelong friend. 

Mr. Noriega's relationship to American intelligence agencies became contractual in either 1966 or 1967, intelligence officials say.
His commanding officer at the Chiriqui Province garrison, Major Omar Torrijos, gave him an intriguing assignment: Mr. Noriega would organize the province's first intelligence service. 

The spy network would serve two clients: the Panamanian government, by monitoring political opponents in the region, and the U.S., by tracking the growing Communist influence in the unions organized at United Fruit Co. 's banana plantations in Bocas del Toros and Puerto Armuelles.
United Fruit was one of the two largest contributors to Panama's national income.
Satisfying its interests was a priority for any Panamanian leader. 

Mr. Noriega's initial retainer was only $50 to $100 a month, plus occasional gifts of liquor or groceries from the American PX, a former intelligence official says.
It was modest pay by American standards, but a healthy boost to his small military salary, which fellow officers remember as having been $300 to $400 monthly. 

"He did it very well," recalls Boris Martinez, a former Panamanian colonel who managed Mr. Noriega and his operation. "He started building the files that helped him gain power." 

A National Guard job assumed by Capt. Noriega in 1964 -- as chief of the transit police in David City, capital of the Chiriqui Province -- was tailor-made for an aspiring super-spy.
By pressuring taxi and bus drivers who needed licenses, he gained a ready cache of information.
He knew which local luminaries had been caught driving drunk, which had been found with their mistresses. 

This proved particularly valuable to the Panamanian government in 1967, when union leaders were planning a May Day march that the government feared could turn violent.
Mr. Noriega had learned that a local union leader was sleeping with the wife of his deputy.
So he splashed the information on handbills that he distributed throughout the banana-exporting city of Puerto Armuelles, which was ruled by United Fruit Co.
The campaign so divided union leaders that the government found them far easier to control. 

"It was like a play on Broadway," recalls Mr. Martinez. "Noriega managed the whole thing.
He was superb.
Noriega was an expert at bribing and blackmailing people." 

During his years in Chiriqui, however, Mr. Noriega also revealed himself as an officer as perverse as he was ingenious.
Rodrigo Miranda, a local lawyer and human-rights monitor, recalls an intoxicated Noriega visiting prisoners in their cells at the 5th Zone Garrison headquarters in David, where he had his offices.
Mr. Noriega would order them all to take off their clothes and run around the courtyard naked, laughing at them and then retreating to his office. "People started wondering if something was wrong with him," Mr. Miranda recalls. 

But through this period, so far as the U.S. military was concerned, Mr. Noriega was a model recruit.
He signed up for intelligence and counter-intelligence training under American officers at Fort Gulick in Panama in July 1967, according to a copy of a 1983 resume with details Mr. Noriega has since classified as secret.
He flew to Fort Bragg, N.C., in September of that year for a course in psychological operations, returning to the School of the Americas in Panama for a two-month course called "military intelligence for officers." 

Some American officers interpreted his eagerness and studiousness as a sign of loyalty, but they did so falsely.
He rose to chief of intelligence in Panama's socalled G-2 in 1970 after providing populist dictator Torrijos the critical support to defeat a coup attempt against him a year earlier.
He became Gen. Torrijos's inseparable shadow, and the holder of all Panama's secrets.
Mr. Noriega, by now a lieutenant colonel, expanded his contacts to include the Cubans -- not to mention the Israelis, the Taiwanese and any other intelligence service that came knocking.
When U.S. diplomats complained to the CIA of Col. Noriega's moonlighting, intelligence experts always insisted that his allegiance was first to the Americans. 

"Early on in the State Department, we took to calling him the rent-a-colonel, in tribute to his ability to simultaneously milk the antagonistic intelligence services of Cuba and the United States," recalls Francis J. McNeil, who, as deputy assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, first ran across reports about Mr. Noriega in 1977. "Some of us wondered how our intelligence people could put so much stock in his information when he was just as close to the Cubans." 

Even at this early stage, drugs caused additional concerns.
During the Nixon administration, the Drug Enforcement Administration became dismayed at the extent of the G-2's connections to arrested drug traffickers.
One DEA agent drew up a list of five options for dealing with Col. Noriega, one of which was assassination. 

The head of the DEA at the time, John Ingersoll, scotched the assassination plan.
But he did fly to Panama to scold dictator Torrijos on the drug ties of Panamanian officials, including Mr. Noriega.
Mr. Ingersoll later recalled that Gen. Torrijos seemed afraid to act on the concerns of the U.S. "Everybody was afraid of him," Mr. Ingersoll says. 

Mr. Noriega became an even greater threat in 1976, when U.S. intelligence services discovered that he had been buying recordings of electronically monitored conversations from three sergeants working for the U.S. Army's 470th Military Intelligence Group.
The tapes included wiretaps of Gen. Torrijos's own phone, according to American intelligence officials. 

"We caught him with his hands on our cookie jar," says former CIA Director Stansfield Turner. 

For the first time, the U.S. considered cutting Mr. Noriega from its intelligence payroll -- and the deliberations were intense, Mr. Turner says. "In the world of intelligence, if you want to get information, you get it from seedy characters.
The question is how much you get tied in with seedy characters so they can extort you." 

Intelligence officials to this day worry whether Mr. Noriega sold sensitive information on the recordings to the Cubans or others.
Mr. Turner was troubled enough to cancel the U.S. contract with the rent-a-colonel at the beginning of the Carter administration. 

The U.S. soon found new cause for concern: gun-running.
Prosecutors in Southern Florida indicted five Panamanians on charges of illegally running arms to Sandinista rebels trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan government of Mr. Somoza.
They included one of Mr. Noriega's closest friends and business partners, Carlos Wittgreen.
And the investigators were quickly closing in on Mr. Noriega himself. 

At the time, though, in 1979, the U.S. was once again flirting with its longtime Latin American spy.
Mr. Noriega made plans to fly to Washington for a meeting with his counterpart at the Pentagon.
Dade County and federal authorities, learning that he intended to fly through Miami, made plans to arrest him on the gun-running charges as soon as he hit U.S. soil.
It was a Friday in June. 

The Pentagon foiled the plan.
According to military officers at the time, word was passed to Mr. Noriega by his American hosts that the police would be waiting.
On Monday, U.S. officials received a routine, unclassified message from the military group commander in Panama. "Due to health reasons, Lt. Col. Noriega has elected to postpone his visit to Washington," it read. 

Prosecutors in Miami received yet another setback.
Their original indictment against Mr. Wittgreen, the friend of Mr. Noriega, and the other four was dismissed on a technicality.
But now, along with reindicting Mr. Noriega's pal, they intended to charge Mr. Noriega himself, on allegations that he was involved in the illegal trading of some $2 million in arms. 

In January 1980, Jerome Sanford, as assistant U.S. attorney, was summoned to a meeting with a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent assigned to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Miami.
Panamanian dictator Torrijos, he was told, had granted the shah of Iran asylum in Panama as a favor to Washington.
Mr. Sanford was told Mr. Noriega's friend, Mr. Wittgreen, would be handling the shah's security.
It wouldn't be a good idea to indict him -- much less Mr. Noriega, the prosecutor was told. 

After prodding from Mr. Sanford, U.S. Attorney Jack Eskenazi pleaded with Justice Department officials in Washington to let the indictment proceed. "Unfortunately," Mr. Eskenazi wrote in a letter, "those of us in law enforcement in Miami find ourselves frequently attempting to enforce the laws of the United States but simultaneously being caught between foreign policy considerations over which we have no control." The letter, along with a detailed prosecution memo, sat on the desks of Justice officials for months before the case died a quiet death. 

"I think if we had been allowed to go ahead then we wouldn't have the problems we have now," Mr. Sanford says. "If he had been found guilty, we could have stopped him." 

In August 1983, Mr. Noriega took over as General and de-facto dictator of Panama, having maneuvered his way to the top only two years after the mysterious death in a plane crash of his old boss Omar Torrijos.
Soon, the military became a veritable mafia controlling legal and illegal businesses.
The Reagan administration also put Mr. Noriega's G-2 back on the U.S. payroll.
Payments averaged nearly $200,000 a year from the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency and the CIA. 

Although working for U.S. intelligence, Mr. Noriega was hardly helping the U.S. exclusively.
During the Reagan years he expanded his business and intelligence contacts with the Cubans and the Sandinistas.
He allegedly entered into Panama's first formal business arrangement with Colombian drug bosses, according to Floyd Carlton, a pilot who once worked for Mr. Noriega and who testified before the U.S. grand jury in Miami that would ultimately indict the Panamanian on drug charges. 

But Mr. Noriega was convinced the Reagan White House wouldn't act against him, recalls his close ally Jose Blandon, because he had an insurance policy: his involvement with the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Mr. Blandon says the general allowed the Contras to set up a secret training center in Panama.
Mr. Noriega also conveyed intelligence from his spy operation inside the Nicaraguan capital of Managua.
And on at least one occasion, in the spring of 1985, he helped arrange a sabotage attack on a Sandinista arsenal in Nicaragua.
Although, his help for the Contra cause was limited, it was enough to win him important protectors in the Reagan administration, says Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who then served on the Senate Intelligence Committee. "Noriega played U.S. intelligence agencies and the U.S. government like a violin," he says. 

An incident in 1984 suggested one additional means by which Mr. Noriega might have maintained such influence with Washington -- by compromising U.S. officials.
Curtin Windsor, then the ambassador to Costa Rica, recalls being invited to Panama by Mr. Noriega's brother Luis Carlos for a weekend of deep sea fishing and "quiet, serious conversation" on the Aswara Peninsula.
Mr. Windsor notified Everett E. Briggs, the U.S. ambassador to Panama, of the invitation. "Briggs screamed," Mr. Windsor recalls.
He says Mr. Briggs told him he was being set up for a "honey trap," in which Mr. Noriega would try to involve him in an orgy and then record the event "with sound and video." Mr. Briggs, on vacation after resigning his position at the National Security Council, couldn't be reached for comment. 

As Mr. Noriega's political troubles grew, so did his offers of assistance to the Contras, an apparent attempt to curry more favor in Washington.
For instance, he helped steal the May 1984 Panamanian elections for the ruling party.
But just one month later, he also contributed $100,000 to a Contra leader, according to documents released for Oliver North's criminal trial in Washington, D.C. 

Yet, his political setbacks mounted.
Mr. Noriega was accused of ordering in 1985 the beheading of Hugo Spadafora, his most outspoken political opponent and the first man to publicly finger Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
He then ousted President Nicholas Ardito Barletta, a former World Bank official with close ties to the U.S., after Mr. Barletta tried to create a commission to investigate the murder.
And, all the while, Panama's debt problems continued to grow.
Mr. Noriega was growing desperate. 

In late 1986, he made an offer he thought the U.S. couldn't refuse.
As recounted in a stipulation that summarized government documents released for the North trial, Mr. Noriega offered to assassinate the Sandinista leadership in exchange "for a promise to help clean up Noriega's image and a commitment to lift the {U.S.} ban on military sales to the Panamanian Defense Forces." 

"North," the document went on, referring to Oliver North, "has told Noriega's representative that U.S. law forbade such actions.
The representative responded that Noriega had numerous assets in place in Nicaragua and could accomplish many essential things, just as Noriega had helped {the U.S.} the previous year in blowing up a Sandinista arsenal." 

Col. North conveyed the request to his superiors and to Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams, who relayed it to Secretary of State George Shultz.
Mr. Noriega's proposal was turned down.
And Mr. Shultz curtly told Mr. Abrams that the general should be told that only he could repair his tarnished image. 

The end of the marriage was at hand.
Within weeks the unfolding Iran-Contra scandal took away Mr. Noriega's insurance policy.
The death of CIA Director William Casey and resignation of Oliver North allowed anti-Noriega political forces to gain influence.
Public protests against him were triggered in June 1987 due to charges by Diaz Herrera, his former chief of staff, that Mr. Noriega had stolen the 1984 election and had ordered the killing of Messrs. Spadafora and Torrijos.
Few American officials were willing any longer to defend him. 

Lawyers in Miami -- this time working virtually without impediment -- prepared to have him indicted on drug charges in February 1988.
During negotiations with American officials in May 1988 over proposals to drop the U.S. indictments in exchange for his resignation, Mr. Noriega often asked almost plaintively how the Americans, whom he had helped for so many years, could turn against him. 

Now, neither side -- the U.S. nor Mr. Noriega -- has an easy out.
President Bush has sworn to bring him to justice.
Mr. Noriega believes he hasn't any alternative but to continue clutching to power.
It is a knock-out battle -- perhaps to the death. 

In the end, is Mr. Noriega the political equivalent of Frankenstein's monster, created by a well-intentioned but misguided foreign power?
Not quite, Sen. Leahy contends. 

"For short-term gains, people were willing to put up with him.
That allowed him to get stronger and stronger," he says. "I don't think we created him as much as we fed him, nurtured him and let him grow up to be big and strong." 

