.START 

Polaroid Corp., benefiting from staff-reduction savings, reported a strong gain in third-quarter operating results and net income of $29.9 million, or 40 cents a share, after preferred-stock requirements. 

Analysts said the numbers were better than expectations, partly because of strong profit margins and a positive foreign-currency translation.
However, they said the company's flat revenue was a disappointment, and an indication that sales of Polaroid's new conventional film in the U.S. have been sluggish.
Revenue in the third quarter was $437.7 million, almost unchanged from $436.3 million a year earlier. 

Polaroid reported operating profit before taxes and interest costs of $63.1 million for the third quarter, more than double the year-before $24 million.
Charges for staff cuts and other restructuring produced a net loss of $54.1 million, or 77 cents a share, in 1988's third quarter. 

"I'm somewhat skeptical about the underlying demand" for Polaroid products, said Michael Ellmann, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co. "If you believe that a good performance next year is contingent on an acceleration of revenue, there isn't a lot here to base optimism on." Alex Henderson, an analyst with Prudential-Bache, says Polaroid officials told him yesterday that U.S. sales of the company's new conventional film product, introduced in the second quarter, have been "disappointing" after a promising start. 

Sam Yanes, a Polaroid spokesman, said "I don't know about disappointing," but added that the company hasn't been able to get the product on the shelves of some mass-merchandise, discount retailers that it had hoped would be carrying the product already.
Mr. Yanes said the film, One Film, is currently carried at about 15,000 retail outlets, including drugstores and supermarkets. 

For the nine months, Polaroid reported earnings of $98.5 million, or $1.27 a share.
Last year, the company had a nine-month loss of $15.1 million, or 23 cents a share. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Polaroid closed at $47, up $1.125. 

