.START 

L.J. Hooker Corp. is expected to reach an agreement in principle this week to sell Merksamer Jewelers Inc. to management, say executives familiar with the talks. 

L.J. Hooker, based in Atlanta, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection earlier this year.
Currently, its parent company, Hooker Corp. of Sydney, Australia, is being managed by a court-appointed liquidator. 

It is expected that GE Capital Corp., a financial-services subsidiary of General Electric Co., will provide much of the funding for the proposed leveraged buy-out of Merksamer, based in Sacramento, Calif.
A spokesman for GE Capital declined to comment. 

GE Capital has a working relationship with L.J. Hooker.
It is providing $50 million in emergency financing to the company and has agreed to buy as much as $75 million in receivables from B. Altman & Co. and Bonwit Teller, L.J. Hooker's two fully owned department-store chains. 

Sam Merksamer, chief executive officer of the nationwide jewelry chain, and Sanford Sigoloff, chief executive of L.J. Hooker Corp., both declined to comment. 

Currently, Mr. Merksamer owns 20% of the company; L.J. Hooker acquired its 80% interest in the firm in May 1986.
At the time, the Merksamer chain had 11 stores in operation.
Today, there are 77 units, all located in shopping malls. 

In recent weeks Mr. Merksamer has approached a number of his suppliers and asked them to provide letters of intent saying they will continue shipping merchandise to the chain following the buy-out, say those familiar with the situation.
This year, a number of retail leveraged buyouts have failed, causing jitters among suppliers, and Mr. Merksamer apparently wanted assurances that he won't have delivery problems. 

For the year ended June 30, 1989, Merksamer Jewelers had $62 million of revenue and operating profit of $2.5 million. 

The jewelery chain was put up for sale in June.
According to those familiar with the situation, other bidders included Ratners Group PLC of London and Kay Jewelers Inc. First Boston Corp. is advising L.J. Hooker on the sale of the Merksamer business. 

Merksamer was the first in a series of retail acquisitions made by L.J. Hooker.
The company was founded in Sacramento in 1929 by two brothers, Ralph and Walter Merksamer, who operated as DeVon's Jewelers.
In 1979, the pair split the company in half, with Walter and his son, Sam, agreeing to operate under the Merksamer Jewelery name. 

The sale of Merksamer Jewelers is subject to approval by Judge Tina Brozman of U.S. Bankruptcy Court. 

As earlier reported, L.J. Hooker this week received a $409 million bid for its three shopping malls, plus other properties from a consortium led by Honolulu real-estate investor Jay Shidler and A. Boyd Simpson, an Atlanta developer and former L.J. Hooker senior executive.
The offer, which didn't include the Merksamer chain, is being reviewed by Mr. Sigoloff. 

