.START 

In a move that could pose a new competitive challenge to Time Warner Inc. 's powerful Home Box Office, cable giant Tele-Communications Inc. agreed to buy half of Showtime Networks Inc. from Viacom Inc. for $225 million. 

The purchase comes after nearly three years of on-again off-again talks between TCI and Viacom, which has also discussed the sale of an interest in Showtime with other cable operators.
Showtime is a distant No. 2 to Home Box Office, and in May filed a $2.5 billion antitrust suit against Time Warner, charging the company and its HBO and American Television cable units with conspiring to monopolize the pay TV business. 

HBO has close to 24 million subscribers to its HBO and Cinemax networks, while Showtime and its sister service, The Movie Channel, have only about 10 million, according to Paul Kagan Associates, a Carmel, Calif., research firm. 

For TCI, the investment in Showtime puts it in an unusual position; as the largest cable operator, with control of close to 12 million of the nation's 52 million cable subscribers, TCI is HBO's largest customer.
But TCI President John Malone has long been concerned about HBO's dominance of the pay TV business, and has been eager to keep Showtime as a healthy competitor. "It is important to the cable industry that we have a vibrant and competitive pay-television marketplace," Mr. Malone said in a statement. 

In a telephone interview, Robert Thomson, TCI senior vice president, said Showtime's suit against HBO "doesn't involve us, and nothing we're doing here bears any relationship to that." He added, "We don't intend to be drawn into it," noting that TCI won't play any active role in the management of Showtime. 

Linking up Showtime with the largest cable operator in the U.S. could sharply boost its subscribers.
TCI said it may bring in other cable operators as investors, a practice it has employed in the past with investments in other cable networks, such as The Discovery Channel.
Additional cable partners could boost subscribers even further. 

Time Warner declined comment.
In addition to owning HBO, Time Warner owns American Television & Communications Inc., the nation's second largest cable operator after TCI. Viacom also owns cable systems, but it is the 14th largest operator of such systems, with less than one million subscribers. 

The TCI investment is a big victory for Viacom's chief executive officer, Frank Biondi, and Winston H. Cox, president of the Showtime unit. "This takes any question of Showtime's viability and puts it away once and for all," Mr. Biondi said in a telephone interview. 

The fight between HBO and Showtime is particularly acrimonious because Mr. Biondi is the former chief executive of HBO, and Mr. Cox served as chief of marketing for the service.
They were both hired by Sumner Redstone, the Boston billionaire who took control of Viacom three years ago in a leveraged buy-out. 

Time Warner has vigorously denied all of Viacom's allegations. 

