.START 

Wall Street continued to buckle under the public outcry against computer-driven program trading. 

Kidder, Peabody & Co., a unit of General Electric Co., announced it would stop doing stock-index arbitrage for its own account, and Merrill Lynch & Co. pulled out of the practice altogether. 

At the New York Stock Exchange, which has been buffeted by complaints from angry individual investors and the exchange's own listed companies, Chairman John J. Phelan Jr. held an emergency meeting with senior partners of some of the Big Board's 49 stock specialist firms.
The specialists, a trader said, were "livid" about Mr. Phelan's recent remarks that sophisticated computer-driven trading strategies are "here to stay." Many investors blame program trading for wild swings in the stock market, including the 190-point plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average on Oct. 13.
A specialist is an exchange member designated to maintain a fair and orderly market in a specified stock. 

Mr. Phelan's meeting with the floor brokers comes as he prepares to explain the exchange's position on program trading to key congressional regulators in a closed session tomorrow, according to exchange officials. 

A Big Board spokesman would only say, "We're working the problem and looking at the issue and meeting with a broad number of customers and constituents to get their views and ideas on the issue." The program-trading outcry was taken to a new level when giant Contel Corp. said it and 20 or more of the Big Board's listed companies are forming an unprecedented alliance to complain about the exchange's role in program trading. 

The decision by Merrill, the nation's largest securities firm, represents the biggest retreat yet from program trading.
Merrill has been the fourth-biggest stock-index arbitrage trader on the Big Board this year, executing an average of 18.1 million shares a month in such trades, or about one million shares a day. 

Merrill's move is one of the most sweeping program-trading pullbacks of recent days, because the big securities firm will no longer execute stock-index arbitrage trades for customers.
Most Wall Street firms, in pulling back, have merely stopped such trading for their own accounts. 

Merrill has been one of the main firms executing index arbitrage for customers.
Merrill also said it is lobbying for significant regulatory controls on program trading, including tough margin -- or down-payment -- requirements and limits on price moves for program-driven financial futures. 

Merrill, in a statement by Chairman William A. Schreyer and President Daniel P. Tully, said index arbitrage "has been clearly identified in the investing public's mind as a contributing factor to excess market volatility," so Merrill won't execute such trades until "effective controls" are in place. 

In stock-index arbitrage, traders buy and sell large amounts of stocks with offsetting trades in stock-index futures and options.
The idea is to lock in profits from short-term swings in volatile markets. 

Last Thursday, PaineWebber Group Inc. also said it would cease index arbitrage altogether, but the firm wasn't as big an index arbitrager as Merrill is.
Other large firms, including Bear, Stearns & Co. and Morgan Stanley & Co., last week announced a pullback from index arbitrage, but only for the firms' own accounts. 

Kidder made an abrupt about-face on program trading yesterday, after a special meeting between the firm's president and chief executive officer, Michael Carpenter, and its senior managers.
Just a week ago, Mr. Carpenter staunchly defended index arbitrage at Kidder, the most active index-arbitrage trading firm on the stock exchange this year.
Index arbitrage, Mr. Carpenter said last week, doesn't have a "negative impact on the market as a whole" and Kidder's customers were "sophisticated" enough to know that. 

But yesterday, Mr. Carpenter said big institutional investors, which he wouldn't identify, "told us they wouldn't do business with firms" that continued to do index arbitrage for their own accounts. "We were following the trend of our competitors who were under pressure from institutions," he said. 

Kidder so far this year has executed a monthly average of 37.8 million shares in index-arbitrage trading, and is second only to Morgan Stanley in overall program trading, which includes index arbitrage.
Most of Kidder's program trading is for its own account, according to the New York Stock Exchange. 

Kidder denied that GE's chairman and chief executive, John F. Welch, had anything to do with Kidder's decision.
But at least one chief executive said he called Mr. Welch to complain about Kidder's aggressive use of program trading, and other market sources said they understood that Mr. Welch received many phone calls complaining about Kidder's reliance on index arbitrage as a major business.
Kidder has generally been sensitive to suggestions that GE makes decisions for its Kidder unit. "Our decision had nothing to do with any pressure Mr. Welch received," Mr. Carpenter said. "This was a Kidder Peabody stand-alone decision." 

A spokeswoman for GE in Fairfield, Conn., said, "Absolutely no one spoke to Jack Welch on this subject" and added, "Anyone who claims they talked to Jack Welch isn't telling the truth." 

Supporters of index arbitrage haven't been publicly sticking up for the trading strategy, as some did during the post-crash outcry of 1987.
But Merrill Lynch, in its statement about pulling out of index arbitrage, suggested that the current debate has missed the mark. 

Merrill said it continues to believe that "the causes of excess market volatility are far more complex than any particular computer trading strategy.
Indeed, there are legitimate hedging strategies used by managers of large portfolios such as pension funds that involve program trading as a means of protecting the assets of their pension beneficiaries." 

Merrill's index arbitragers will continue to do other kinds of computer-assisted program trading, so there probably won't be any layoffs at the firm, people familiar with Merrill's program operation said. 

Meanwhile, Bear Stearns Chairman and Chief Executive Alan C. Greenberg said his firm will continue stock-index arbitrage for its clients.
At the firm's annual meeting last night, he told shareholders that index arbitrage won't go away, despite the public outcry. "If they think they are going to stop index arbitrage by causing a few Wall Street firms to quit, they are crazy," Mr. Greenberg said. "It's not going to stop it at all." 

Mr. Greenberg, noting that stock-index arbitrage rises and ebbs with stock market's volatility, said that for the first four months of the firm's fiscal year beginning in July, stock-index arbitrage had been a "break-even" proposition for Bear Stearns. 

In response to a shareholder's suggestion, Mr. Greenberg agreed that European firms will simply pick up the index-arbitrage business left behind by U.S. institutions. 

Pressure from big institutional investors has been the major catalyst for Wall Street's program-trading pullback.
And there was speculation yesterday that Fidelity Investments and other large mutual-fund companies might soon follow the lead of Kemper Corp. and other institutions in cutting off trading business to securities firms that do program trading.
A Fidelity spokesman in Boston denied the speculation, saying the program-trading issue was more of a regulatory problem. 

But a much smaller mutual fund company, the USAA Investment Management Co. unit of USAA, San Antonio, Texas, said it informed nine national brokerage firms it will cease business with them unless they stop index-arbitrage trading.
USAA, with 400,000 mutual fund accounts, manages more than $10 billion, $2 billion of which is in the stock market.
Michael J.C. Roth, USAA executive vice president, called program trading "mindless." He said there is "no valid investment reason" for stock-index futures to exist. 

A program-bashing move is clearly on.
Charles Wohlstetter, chairman of Contel, who is helping organize the alliance of Big Board-listed firms, said he had no time to work yesterday because he received so many phone calls, faxes and letters supporting his view that the Big Board has been turned into a "gambling casino" by program traders. 

"We are reaching the moment of truth" on Wall Street, said Rep. Edward J. Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the House subcommittee on telecommunications and finance. "{Wall Street} is beginning to realize -- as Shakespeare said -- the trouble is not in our stars, but in ourselves." 

Craig Torres and Anne Newman contributed to this article. 

recently ceased index arbitrage for their own accounts, in millions of shares such trading for its own account 

