.START 

Two gunmen entered a Maryland restaurant, ordered two employees to lie on the floor and shot them in the backs of their heads.
The killers fled with less than $100. 

Describing this and other grisly killings, Sen. Strom Thurmond (R., S.C.) recently urged fellow lawmakers to revive a broad federal death penalty. "The ultimate punishment," he declared, "will protect the law-abiding from the vicious, cruel individuals who commit these crimes." 

There's just one problem: The law that Sen. Thurmond is pushing would be irrelevant in the case of the Maryland restaurant murders and almost all other killings.
Most murders are state crimes, so any federal capital-punishment law probably would turn out to be more symbolism than substance. 

Yet the bill is riding high on the furor over drug trafficking.
Senate Republicans, after repeatedly failing to attach death-penalty amendments to unrelated legislation, have finally gotten a full-blown death-penalty bill through committee.
The Democratic leadership agreed to allow a floor vote on the issue before the end of the year -- a debate certain to focus on the alleged racial inequality of death sentencing.
Even some Democrats concede that there is probably a majority in the Senate that favors some kind of broad capital-punishment measure. 

The pending bill, introduced by Mr. Thurmond, would revive the long-dormant federal death-penalty laws by instituting legal procedures required by the Supreme Court.
In 1972, the high court swept aside all capital-punishment laws -- federal and state alike -- as unconstitutional.
But in 1976, the court permitted resurrection of such laws, if they meet certain procedural requirements.
For instance, juries would have to consider specific "aggravating" and "mitigating" factors before deciding whether to condemn someone to death.
Since that 1976 ruling, 37 states have reintroduced the death penalty.
But congressional Democrats have blocked the same from occurring at the federal level, with the exception of a 1988 law allowing capital punishment for certain drug-related homicides. 

The Thurmond bill would establish a federally administered death sentence for 23 crimes, most of which were formerly punishable by death under federal statutes that the Supreme Court invalidated.
Among these crimes are murder on federal land, presidential assassination and espionage.
The Thurmond bill would also add five new crimes punishable by death, including murder for hire. (Separately, the Senate last week passed a bill permitting execution of terrorists who kill Americans abroad.) 

Amid the swirl of punitive rhetoric surrounding the issue, one critical question involves whether a federal death penalty, on top of existing state laws, would deter any would-be criminals. 

For one thing, it's unlikely that many people would receive federal death sentences, let alone be executed.
Most of the crimes incorporated in the Thurmond bill are exceedingly rare -- killing a Supreme Court justice, for instance, or deliberately causing a train wreck that results in a death. 

In fact, only 28 defendants would have been eligible for federal death sentences if the Thurmond bill had been in effect in the past three years, according to a study by the Senate Judiciary Committee's Democratic staff.
The last federal execution before the Supreme Court's 1972 ruling banning the death penalty took place in 1963, meaning that the federal government didn't exercise its execution authority for eight years. 

"In that sense, the whole debate is sort of a fraud," argues a Democratic Senate staff member. "It's distracting attention from serious issues, like how to make DEA, FBI and Customs work together" on drug enforcement. 

Republicans acknowledge that few people would be executed under the Thurmond bill, but they contend that isn't the point. "Many scholars are of the opinion that the mere existence of the penalty deters many people from the commission of capital crimes," says Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah).
Executions, regardless of how frequently they occur, are also "proper retribution" for heinous crimes, Mr. Hatch argues.
Thomas Boyd, a senior Justice Department official, says the new federal drug-related crimes punishable by death since last November may result in a jump in capital sentences, though that hasn't happened so far. 

In addition to resuscitating the old issue of whether death sentences deter criminals, this bill has made race a major part of the death-penalty debate.
Before the bill left committee, Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) attached an amendment that would allow a defendant to escape from a death sentence in jurisdictions shown to have meted out executions in a racist manner. 

The amendment prompted an ironic protest from Mr. Thurmond, who complained that it would "kill" capital punishment.
A large number of studies suggest that state judges and juries have imposed the penalty in a racially discriminatory fashion.
And the Kennedy amendment would invade not only federal but state sentencings, in two important ways.
It would allow all defendants to introduce statistical evidence showing racially disproportionate application of the death penalty in the past.
And it would shift the burden to prosecutors to disprove that discrimination caused any statistical racial disparities. 

"That burden is very difficult, if not impossible, to meet," says Mr. Boyd. "How do you prove a negative?" Since most prosecutors wouldn't be able to demonstrate conclusively that racial considerations didn't affect sentencing, executions everywhere might come to a halt, Mr. Boyd explains. 

At least 15 major studies purport to show that particular states have imposed the death penalty disproportionately against killers of whites compared with blacks, and against black defendants compared with white defendants.
Conservatives question the validity of the studies and note that the Supreme Court ruled in 1987 that such research, regardless of its accuracy, isn't relevant to a constitutional attack on a particular death sentence. 

The Kennedy amendment would, in effect, legislate around the Supreme Court ruling.
Lawyers would eagerly seize on the provision in their death-penalty appeals, says Richard Burr, director of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund's capital-punishment defense team. 

Mr. Kennedy failed to get his amendment incorporated into last year's anti-drug legislation, and it will be severely attacked on the Senate floor this time around.
But if it survives, it could prompt other statutory changes, according to the Mr. Burr.
It might force Congress and the states to narrow the death penalty only to convictions shown to be relatively free of racial imbalance -- murders by repeat offenders who torture their victims, perhaps. 

Narrowing the penalty in this fashion would clearly reduce whatever deterrent effect it now has.
And that, in turn, would only strengthen the argument of those who oppose execution under any circumstances. 

