.START 

Copper futures prices failed to extend Friday's rally.
Declines came because of concern that demand for copper may slow down. 

The December contract was down three cents a pound, settling at $1.1280, which was just above the day's low of $1.1270. 

Futures prices fell during three of five sessions last week, and the losses, individually and cumulatively, were greater than the advances. 

Two of the major factors buoying prices, the prolonged strikes at the Highland Valley mine in Canada and the Cananea mine in Mexico, were finally resolved.
Also, the premiums paid by the U.S. government on a purchase of copper for the U.S. Mint were lower than expected, and acted as a price depressant, analysts said.
The mint purchases were at premiums about 4 1/2 cents a pound above the respective prices for the copper.
At the time merchants were asking for premiums of about five cents a pound. 

All this has led to prolonged selling in futures, mostly on the part of computer-guided funds.
Prices fell through levels regarded as important support areas, which added to the selling. 

The reluctance of traders to buy contracts indicates that they have begun focusing on demand rather than supply.
At least one analyst noted that as production improves, the concern among traders is whether the prospective increased supply will find buyers because of uncertainty over national economies. 

"Demand from Japan is expected to continue strong, but not from other areas of the world into the first quarter of next year," he said. 

Japan normally depends heavily on the Highland Valley and Cananea mines as well as the Bougainville mine in Papua New Guinea.
Recently, Japan has been buying copper elsewhere.
But as Highland Valley and Cananea begin operating, they are expected to resume their roles as Japan's suppliers.
According to Fred Demler, metals economist for Drexel Burnham Lambert, New York, "Highland Valley has already started operating and Cananea is expected to do so soon." 

The Bougainville mine is generally expected to remain closed until at least the end of the year.
It hasn't been operating since May 15 because of attacks by native landowners.
A recent attempt to resume operations was cut short quickly by these attacks. 

However, traders disregarded a potential production disruption in Chile and a continued drop in inventories. 

Workers at two Chilean mines, Los Bronces and El Soldado, which belong to the Exxon-owned Minera Disputado group, will vote Thursday on whether to strike after a two-year labor pact ends today.
The mines produced a total of 110,000 tons of copper in 1988. 

According to Drexel's Mr. Demler, the potential strike is expected to be resolved quickly, which may be one reason why the situation didn't affect prices much.
Another analyst said that, if there was any concern, it was that a strike could encourage other walkouts in Chile. 

London Metal Exchange copper inventories fell 550 tons last week to 83,950 tons, a smaller-than-expected decline.
But that development also had little effect on traders' sentiment. 

Mr. Demler said that stocks of copper in U.S. producers' hands at the end of September were down 16,000 metric tons from August to 30,000 tons.
Outside the U.S., he said, producer stocks at the end of August were 273,000 tons, down 3,000 tons from the end of July. 

Consumer stocks of copper in the U.S. fell to 44,000 tons at the end of September from 54,000 tons a month earlier, and stocks of copper held by consumers and merchants outside of the U.S. at the end of July stood at 123,000 tons, down from 125,000 tons in June.
The high point of foreigners' copper stocks this year was 136,000 tons at the end of April, according to Mr. Demler. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: The prices of most corn, soybean and wheat futures contracts dropped slightly as farmers in the Midwest continued to rebuild stockpiles that were depleted by the 1988 drought.
Buying by the Soviets has helped to prop up corn prices in recent weeks, but a lack of any new purchases kept prices in the doldrums. 

COFFEE: Futures prices rose slightly in a market filled with rumors that a new international coffee agreement might still be achieved.
The December contract ended with a gain of 1.29 cents a pound at 74.35 cents.
According to one analyst, prices opened higher because of reports over the weekend that Brazil and Colombia, at the Pan-American summit meeting in Costa Rica, had agreed to a reduction in their coffee export quotas for the sake of creating a new agreement.
The reports, attributed to the Colombian minister of economic development, said Brazil would give up 500,000 bags of its quota and Colombia 200,000 bags, the analyst said.
These reports were later denied by a high Brazilian official, who said Brazil wasn't involved in any coffee discussions on quotas, the analyst said.
The Colombian minister was said to have referred to a letter that he said President Bush sent to Colombian President Virgilio Barco, and in which President Bush said it was possible to overcome obstacles to a new agreement.
The minister was also quoted as saying that a new pact could be achieved during the first half of next year, according to the analyst. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices showed modest changes in light trading volume.
December delivery gold eased 40 cents an ounce to $380.80.
December silver was off 3.7 cents an ounce at $5.2830.
January platinum rose 90 cents an ounce at $500.20.
The market turned quiet after rising sharply late last week, according to one analyst.
Last week's uncertainty in the stock market and a weaker dollar triggered a flight to safety, he said, but yesterday the market lacked such stimuli.
There was some profit-taking because prices for all the precious metals had risen to levels at which there was resistance to further advance, he said.
The dollar was also slightly firmer and prompted some selling, as well, according to the analyst. 

