.START 

Buying 51% of Rockefeller Group Inc. is right up Mitsubishi Estate Co. 's alley in one sense: The huge Japanese real estate company is entering a long-term relationship with a similarly conservative U.S. owner of tony urban property. 

But in another sense, the $846 million purchase is uncharacteristically nervy, industry analysts say.
The usually cautious giant will become the majority owner of the company that owns New York's beloved Rockefeller Center at a time when tensions over Japanese purchases of U.S. property are at an all-time high. 

Officials of Rockefeller Group and Mitsubishi Estate prefer to focus on the affinities, nearly dismissing the threat of a backlash from the U.S. public. "We think there will be positive as well as negative reactions," says Raymond Pettit, senior vice president and chief financial officer of Rockefeller Group. "On balance, we think it will be positive." 

But some Japanese government officials and businessmen worry that the prominent purchase is just the sort of deal that should be avoided for the time being.
In particular, they criticize the timing, coming as it does on the heels of Sony Corp. 's controversial purchase of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. 

"Officially, yes, we encourage the free flow of direct investment," says a Foreign Ministry official. "But they didn't have to choose this particular moment." 

During the past year, government officials and leading business organizations have repeatedly urged Japanese companies to refrain from flashy real estate purchases in the 

Since the mid-1980s, Japan's other major real estate purchases in the U.S. include Dai-Ichi Seimei America Corp. 's $670 million purchase of an office building at 153 East 53rd St. in Manhattan in 1987 and Mitsui Fudosan Inc. 's $610 million purchase of the Exxon Building, part of Rockefeller Center, in 1986.
In Los Angeles, Arco Plaza was sold to Shuwa Corp. for $620 million in 1986, and Sumitomo Life Insurance Co. paid $300 million for Atlanta's IBM Tower last year. 

Altogether, annual Japanese investment in U.S. commercial real estate grew from about $1.3 billion in 1985 to about $7.1 billion in 1988. 

Many Japanese companies have taken the warnings by the country's leaders to heart and sought development partnerships rather than landmark properties.
Critics say Mitsubishi Estate's decision to buy into Rockefeller reflects the degree to which companies are irritated by the pressure to act for the good of Japan. "Those who have no money and aren't buying think it's right to refrain, but those with money who want to buy for themselves pay no attention," says an official of the Japan-U.S.
Business Council. 

But to Mitsubishi Estate, the acquisition has just the elements that should win support from both sides.
First of all, it is a friendly acquisition in which Rockefeller sought out Mitsubishi Estate and asked it to buy a majority share.
Secondly, the two companies found a similarity in their business and development philosophies and intend to cooperate in a range of activities from real estate to telecommunications.
Finally, Mitsubishi Estate has no plans to interfere with Rockefeller's management beyond taking a place on the board. 

"We'll continue to work with them, in keeping with the reputation of the company, and we'll rely very much on their leadership," says Mitsubishi Estate President Jotaro Takagi. 

Rockefeller may well have found its match in Mitsubishi Estate, a company of long history, strong government ties and sound resources.
In asset terms, Mitsubishi Estate is the largest real estate firm in Japan.
The core of its holdings is 190,000 square meters of incredibly expensive property in the Marunouchi district, the business and financial center of Tokyo, often jokingly called "Mitsubishi Village." 

The Mitsubishi family company acquired that property from the government some 100 years ago when it was a portion of samurai residential land running from the moat of the Imperial Palace east toward the hodgepodge of tiny shops and twisted alleys that made up the merchants' district.
At the time, Japan had just opened its doors to the world after about 250 years of isolation and needed a Western-style business center.
Mitsubishi built the government's dream development, the story goes, in exchange for the official decision to locate Tokyo's central railway station there. 

That was just an early step in a relationship with government that has earned the Mitsubishi group the dubious moniker of "seisho," literally government-business, a title that has the pejorative connotation of doing the government's bidding, but also suggests the clout inherent in maintaining such close ties. 

Mitsubishi Estate is one of the dozens of companies in today's Mitsubishi group.
It's known for its cautiousness in part because it has had little need for bold overseas ventures: In the year ended March 31, 57.4% of its total revenue came from office building management.
Its earnings can rise 10% to 12% annually simply from the natural turnover of tenants and automatic rent increases, says Graeme McDonald, an industry analyst at James Capel Pacific Ltd.
For the latest fiscal year, the company's net income jumped a robust 19% to 35.5 billion yen ($250.2 million). 

For Mitsubishi Estate, the Rockefeller purchase will catapult it firmly into the overseas real estate business, the one area where it has lagged notably behind Japanese competitors such as Mitsui, which had purchased the Exxon Building. 

"Japanese companies need to invest in overseas real estate for diversification," says Yoshio Shima, an industry analyst at Goldman Sachs (Japan) Corp. 

Rockefeller isn't the first overseas purchase for Mitsubishi Estate -- it has already played a leading role in designing Los Angeles's Citicorp Plaza.
But the Rockefeller investment is its largest.
Nonetheless, it will barely make a dent in Mitsubishi Estate's finances, analysts say. 

Mitsubishi Estate hasn't decided how it will raise the funds for the purchase, which are due in cash next April, but the Marunouchi holdings alone are estimated to have a market value of as much as 10 trillion yen to 11 trillion yen.
Moreover, as a member of the Mitsubishi group, which is headed by one of Japan's largest banks, it is sure to win a favorable loan.
Analysts say the company also could easily issue new convertible bonds or warrants. 

Meanwhile, at home, Mitsubishi has control of some major projects.
It is the largest private-sector landowner of the Minato-Mirai 21 project, a multibillion-yen development in the port city of Yokohama, about an hour outside Tokyo.
The project is one of a select group of public projects opened to U.S. firms under a U.S.-Japan construction trade agreement reached last year.
The centerpiece of that complex, the Landmark Tower, will be Japan's tallest building when it is completed in 1993. 

Mitsubishi is also pushing ahead with a controversial plan to redevelop Marunouchi into a business center of high-tech buildings, a project budgeted for 30 years and six trillion yen. 

