.START 

Many in Washington say President Bush will have to raise taxes to pay for his war on drugs.
We have a better idea: Dismantle HUD to pay for the war on drugs. 

Housing and Urban Development's budget is $17 billion.
From what we and the nation have been reading, the money isn't being spent very well.
The single most important contribution the government could make now to help the poor is to get the specter of drugs out of their neighborhoods.
If that takes money, take it away from this discredited federal department. 

But of course the Democrats pillorying HUD in hearings and in the press have no such solution in mind.
Instead, they're scrambling to protect the very programs at the heart of the HUD scandal. 

This month, HUD Secretary Jack Kemp unveiled a series of proposed reforms to improve management at HUD. No doubt many of his ideas are worthy, but ultimately he is proposing to make fundamentally flawed programs work slightly more fairly and efficiently.
Congress is unlikely to go even that far. 

Last week, Secretary Kemp ran into a buzzsaw of criticism from House Banking Committee members.
They were appalled, for instance, that he wanted to target more of the $3 billion Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program to low-income projects and zero out the notorious "discretionary" funds that have allowed HUD officials to steer contracts to political cronies. 

These development grants mainly enrich developers who want to put up shopping centers and parking garages.
They also give those in Congress political credit for bringing home the pork, and so they are popular with such Members as Mary Rose Oakar. 

Rep. Oakar, a Democrat from Cleveland, wants a $6.9 million grant so Cleveland can build an 18-story Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
She says it'd create 600 jobs and bring Cleveland tourist revenue.
HUD says the project doesn't qualify, and Mr. Kemp says that rock 'n' roll musicians and the music industry ought to put up the money. 

At the hearing, Rep. Oakar started wailing about "phoney baloney regulations" that would stand between her and "housing for downtown Cleveland." Rep. Chalmers Wylie, an Ohio Republican, rallied to the cause: "I think the gentlelady is making an important statement.
The implication that if a congressman calls about a project in his district there's something wrong, I think is most unfortunate." 

We're sure some theologian can explain the difference between what the Republican consultants have been doing with HUD and what these gentleladies and gentlemen want to do with HUD.
Our view is that given Congress's attitude toward HUD, the place probably is beyond reform. 

For more than 50 years the federal government has tried various ways to provide housing for the poor and revive cities.
In the process HUD has wasted untold billions, created slums and invited corruption. 

Much of HUD's spending actually is disguised welfare for developers or the middle class.
That includes the CDBG funds and the Federal Housing Administration, which loans out money for private home mortgages and has just been discovered to be $4 billion in the hole.
Selling the FHA's loan portfolio to the highest bidder would save the taxpayers untold billions in future losses. 

Some HUD money actually does trickle down to the poor, and zeroing out housing middlemen would free up more money for public housing tenants to manage and even own their units.
The rest ought to be used to clean out drugs from the neighbhorhoods. 

Rival gangs have turned cities into combat zones.
Even suburban Prince George's County, Md., reported last week there have been a record 96 killings there this year, most of them drug-related.
Innocent bystanders often are the victims.
A man in a wheelchair was gunned down in the crossfire of a Miami drug battle.
A three-year-old Brooklyn boy was used as a shield by a drug dealer. 

Decent life in the inner cities won't be restored unless the government reclaims the streets from the drug gangs.
Until then, the billions HUD spends on inner-city housing simply is wasted. 

It's still unclear whether Secretary Kemp wants to completely overhaul the engine room at HUD or just tighten a few screws here and there.
No doubt he believes the place can be salvaged.
Having seen the hypocrisy with which Congress has addressed the HUD scandals, we disagree.
It's time to scrap the politically infested spending machine HUD has become and channel the resources into the drug war. 

