.START 

Digital Equipment Corp. is planning a big coming-out party on Tuesday for its first line of mainframe computers.
But an uninvited guest is expected to try to crash the party. 

On the morning of the long-planned announcement, International Business Machines Corp. is to introduce its own new mainframe. "Their attitude is, `You want to talk mainframes, we'll talk mainframes, '" says one computer industry executive. 

"They're deliberately trying to steal our thunder," a Digital executive complains. "Maybe we should take it as a compliment." 

Digital's target is the $40 billion market for mainframe computers, the closet-sized number-crunchers that nearly every big company needs to run its business.
IBM, based in Armonk, N.Y., has dominated the market for decades. 

That doesn't scare Digital, which has grown to be the world's second-largest computer maker by poaching customers of IBM's mid-range machines.
Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., hopes to stage a repeat performance in mainframes, and it has spent almost $1 billion developing the new technology.
A spoiler, nimble Tandem Computers Inc. in Cupertino, Calif., jumped into the fray earlier this week with an aggressively priced entry. 

IBM appears more worried about Digital, which has a broad base of customers waiting for the new line, dubbed the VAX 9000. "It's going to be nuclear war," says Thomas Willmott, a consultant with Aberdeen Group Inc. 

The surge in competition is expected to stir new life into the huge mainframe market, where growth has slowed to single digits in recent years.
IBM's traditional mainframe rivals, including Unisys Corp., Control Data Corp. and NCR Corp., have struggled recently. 

Digital is promising a new approach.
Robert M. Glorioso, Digital's vice president for high performance systems, says Digital's mainframe is designed not as a central computer around which everything revolves, but as part of a decentralized network weaving together hundreds of workstations, personal computers, printers and other devices.
And unlike IBM's water-cooled mainframes, it doesn't need any plumbing. 

The challengers will have a big price advantage.
Digital is expected to tag its new line from about $1.24 million to $4.4 million and up, depending on configuration.
That's about half the price of comparably equipped IBM mainframes.
Tandem's pricing is just as aggressive. 

The heightened competition will hit IBM at a difficult time.
The computer giant's current mainframe line, which has sold well and has huge profit margins, is starting to show its age.
The new 3090s due next week will boost performance by only about 8% to 10%.
And IBM isn't expected to deliver a new generation of mainframes until 1991. 

Still, no one expects IBM's rivals to deliver a knockout.
IBM has a near-monopoly on mainframes, with an estimated 70% share of the market.
IBM is five times the size of Digital -- and 40 times the size of Tandem -- and wields enormous market power.
It counts among its customers a majority of the world's largest corporations, which entrust their most critical business information to IBM computers. 

"We're not going to walk in and replace a company's corporate accounting system if it's already running on an IBM mainframe," concedes Kenneth H. Olsen, Digital's president. 

He says Digital will target faster-growing market segments such as on-line transaction processing, which includes retail-sales tracking, airline reservations and bank-teller networks.
Tandem, which already specializes in on-line transaction processing, is a potent competitor in that market. 

A key marketing target for Digital will be the large number of big customers who already own both Digital and IBM systems.
One such company is Bankers Trust Co. Stanley Rose, a vice president, technological and strategic planning at Bankers Trust, says that despite Digital's low prices, "we aren't about to unplug our IBM mainframes for a DEC machine.
The software conversion costs would dwarf any savings." 

But Mr. Rose is still looking seriously at the 9000.
Bankers Trust uses Digital's VAX to run its huge money-transfer and capital markets accounts, juggling hundreds of billions of dollars each day, he says.
As that system grows, larger computers may be needed. "In the past, customers had to go to IBM when they outgrew the VAX. Now they don't have to," he says. "That's going to cost IBM revenue." 

Analysts say Digital can expect this pent-up demand for the new VAX to fuel strong sales next year.
Barry F. Willman, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., estimates the 9000 could boost sales by more than $1 billion in the fiscal year beginning in July.
He bases the estimate on a survey of hundreds of Digital's largest customers. 

Although Digital will announce a full family of mainframes next week, it isn't expected to begin shipping in volume until next year.
The first model available will be the 210, which is likely to appeal to many technical and scientific buyers interested in the optional super-charger, or vector processor, says Terry Shannon of International Data Corp., a market research concern. 

Four more models, aimed squarely at IBM's commercial customers, are expected to begin shipping in late June.
Most analysts don't expect the new mainframes to begin contributing significantly to revenue before the fiscal first quarter, which begins next July 1. 

Digital's new line has been a long time coming.
The company has long struggled to deliver a strong mainframe-class product, and made a costly decision in 1988 to halt development of an interim product meant to stem the revenue losses at the high end.
Digital's failure to deliver a true mainframe-class machine before now may have cost the company as much as $1 billion in revenue in fiscal 1989, Mr. Willman says. 

IBM will face still more competition in coming months.
Amdahl Corp., backed by Japan's Fujitsu Ltd., has a growing share of the market with its low-priced, IBM-compatible machines.
And National Advanced Systems, a joint venture of Japan's Hitachi Ltd. and General Motors Corp. 's Electronic Data Systems, is expected to unveil a line of powerful IBM-compatible mainframes later this year. 

NOTE: NAS is National Advanced Systems, 

CDC -- Control Data Corp., Bull NH Information Systems Inc. 

Source: International Data Corp. 

Compiled by Publishers Weekly from data from large-city bookstores, bookstore chains and local bestseller lists across the U.S. Copyright 1989 by Reed Publishing USA. 

