.START 

Valley National Corp. reported a third-quarter net loss of $72.2 million, or $3.65 a share, and suspended its quarterly dividend because of potential losses on its Arizona real estate holdings. 

The Phoenix-based holding company for Arizona's largest bank said it added $121 million to its allowance for losses on loans and for real estate owned.
The company earned $18.7 million, or 95 cents a share, a year earlier. 

For the nine months, Valley National posted a net loss of $136.4 million, or $6.90 a share.
It had profit of $48.6 million, or $2.46 a share, in the 1988 period.
Valley National had been paying a quarterly dividend of 36 cents a share. 

"The Arizona real estate market continues to be depressed, and there is still uncertainty as to when values will recover," James P. Simmons, chairman, said.
The decision to increase the loan-loss reserve and suspend the dividend is "both prudent and in the best long-term interest of the shareholders," he said. 

Valley National said it made the decision on the basis of an "overall assessment of the marketplace" and the condition of its loan portfolio and after reviewing it with federal regulators.
The addition to reserves comes on top of a provision of $199.7 million that was announced in June. 

In July, Moody's downgraded $400 million of the company's debt, saying the bank holding company hadn't taken adequate write-offs against potential losses on real estate loans despite its second-quarter write-down.
Richard M. Greenwood, Valley National's executive vice president, said then that the company believed the write-downs were "adequate" and didn't plan to increase its reserves again. 

Bruce Hoyt, a banking analyst with Boettcher & Co., a Denver brokerage firm, said Valley National "isn't out of the woods yet." The key will be whether Arizona real estate turns around or at least stabilizes, he said. 

"They've stepped up to the plate to take the write-downs, but when markets head down, a company is always exposed to further negative surprises," Mr. Hoyt said. 

Valley National closed yesterday at $24.25 a share, down $1, in national over-the-counter trading. 

