.START 

FARMERS REAP abundant crops.
But how much will shoppers benefit? 

The harvest arrives in plenty after last year's drought-ravaged effort: The government estimates corn output at 7.45 billion bushels, up 51% from last fall.
Soybean production swells 24%.
As a result, prices paid to farmers for the commodities, which are used in products as diverse as bubble gum and chicken feed, plummet 20% to 33%.
But don't expect too much in the way of price breaks soon at the supermarket.
Economists expect consumer food prices to jump 5.5% this year to the highest level since 1980 and up from last year's 4.1% rise.
Next year may see a drop of one percentage point. 

Beef prices, hovering near records since the drought, could drop in earnest this winter if ranchers expand herds.
Lower feed prices may help animals eat more cheaply, but humans have to factor in an expensive middleman: the processor.
Food companies probably won't cut their prices much, blaming other costs. "Labor takes the biggest single chunk out of the `food dollar, '" says Frank Pankyo of the Food Institute. 

Stokely says stores revive specials like three cans of peas for 99 cents.
Two cans cost 89 cents during the drought. 

IF IN VITRO fertilization works, it usually does so after only a few tries. 

Costly infertility problems and procedures proliferate as aging baby boomers and others decide to have children -- now.
It's estimated that one in six couples experiences infertility, and in 1987, Americans spent about $1 billion to fight the problem.
Only about five states now offer some form of insurance coverage, but more are expected.
A letter in the New England Journal of Medicine notes that while technology offers "almost endless hope . . . when to stop has become a difficult question. . . ." 

The authors, from Boston's Beth Israel Hospital, say that 84% of the 50 births they followed occurred after only two in vitro cycles.
It adds that births were "extremely unlikely" after the fourth cycle and concludes couples who don't achieve a pregnancy after four to six procedures should be advised that success is unlikely.
Some couples continue to try. "Such determination may translate into extreme physical, emotional and financial costs," the letter warns. 

MARKET MOVES, these managers don't.
Only three of the 25 corporate pension fund managers attending a Lowry Consulting Group client conference say they plan to change the asset allocation mix in their portfolios because of the market drop. 

WORLD ODDITIES come alive in a multimedia version of the Guinness Book of Records.
The $99 CD-ROM disk (it can only be played on an Apple Macintosh computer at the moment) combines animation, music and sound.
Among the Guinness disk's wonders: the world's loudest recorded belch. 

ARTY FAX from David Hockney begins a tongue-in-cheek exhibit today at New York's Andre Emmerich Gallery.
One of the artist's earliest Fax works was "Little Stanley Sleeping," a portrait of his dog. 

PACS GIVE and receive in a debatable duet with employees' favored charities. 

The Federal Election Commission clears corporate plans to donate to an employee's chosen charity in exchange for the worker's gift to the company political action committee.
Latest approvals: Bell Atlantic's New Jersey Bell and General Dynamics.
Companies get more political clout plus a possible tax-deductible charitable donation -- so far no word from the IRS on deductibility.
Detroit Edison, the plan pioneer, generated $54,000 in matching funds this year, up from $39,000 in 1988.
But the utility may not continue next year. "We're on a tight budget," says Detroit Edison's Carol Roskind. 

Two election commission members opposed the matching plans.
Scott E. Thomas says the plans give employees "a bonus in the form of charitable donations made from an employer's treasury" in exchange for the political donation. "The U.S. government could be, in effect, subsidizing political contributions to corporate PACs," he says.
New Jersey Bell awaits state clearance. 

Despite federal approval, General Dynamics says it decided it won't go ahead with the matching program. 

CHRISTMAS SHOPPERS find a helping hand from some catalog companies. 

Blunt Ellis & Loewi estimates direct mail catalog sales rose to $12 billion last year.
And while it's too soon to tell how sales will fare in the important 1989 Christmas season, some companies take steps to ease the usual 11th-hour crush.
Spiegel promises a "Guaranteed Christmas," with a pledge to deliver goods before Christmas if ordered by Dec. 20.
And, for an extra $6, Land's End will deliver orders within two days; customers can designate the day. 

Spiegel, which also owns Eddie Bauer and Honeybee, says that since 1987, sales have doubled during the week before Christmas.
An L.L. Bean spokeswoman notes: "People are just used to living in a last-minute society." Blunt Ellis, a Milwaukee brokerage firm, says part of the reason catalog sales grow in popularity is because consumers have more money but less time to spend it. 

L.L. Bean hires about 2,700 workers for the season rush, about 300 more than last year; Land's End hires 2,000. 

BRIEFS: Guarana Antarctica, a Brazilian soft drink, is brought to the U.S. by Amcap, Chevy Chase, Md.
New Product News says the beverage "looks like ginger ale, tastes a little like cherries and smells like bubble gum." . . . "Amenities" planned for Chicago's new Parkshore Tower apartments include an on-site investment counselor. 

