.START 

Michelle Pfeiffer can't chew gum and sing at the same time.
But on the evidence of "The Fabulous Baker Boys," that may be the only thing she can't do, at least when she's acting in movies. 

As the tough, slinky lounge chanteuse in "The Fabulous Baker Boys," Ms. Pfeiffer sings for herself, and more than passably well.
Her Susie Diamond handles a song the way the greats do, like she's hearing the way it should sound inside her head and she's concentrating on matching that internal tone.
Yet her intensity stops and starts with the music.
When she isn't performing for an audience, she prepares for a song by removing the wad of gum from her mouth, and indicates that she's finished by sticking the gum back in. 

Like almost everything in this wonderfully romantic and edgy movie, Ms. Pfeiffer's Susie seems like someone you've seen before, in numerous show-biz stories (even her name, Susie Diamond, sounds like a character Marilyn Monroe must have played).
Yet nothing about "Baker Boys," and certainly nothing about Ms. Pfeiffer, really is like something from the video vault. 

Steve Kloves, the young writer and director (he isn't yet 30), has only one produced picture to his credit; he wrote the screenplay for "Racing With the Moon," a lovely coming-of-age picture set in the '40s.
Both movies are infused with the nostalgic sensibility of someone much older, someone who doesn't dismiss dreams, but who also has enough experience to see his limits.
However, Mr. Kloves directs his own material without sentimentality and at its own eccentric pace; "Baker Boys" is both bluesy and funny. 

He's put a fresh spin on material that could come off terribly cliched; for example, the way Susie wows an audience the first time she sings with the Baker Boys.
Of course, it doesn't hurt that Mr. Kloves has made up for his lack of experience behind the camera with technicians who know exactly what they're doing. 

Much of the picture's sensuality emerges from cinematographer Michael Ballhaus's slyly seductive lens work.
After working for years with Werner Rainer Fassbinder, the late German director, and more recently with Martin Scorsese ("After Hours," "The Color of Money," "The Last Temptation of Christ"), Mr. Ballhaus has developed a distinctively fluid style.
And Dave Grusin's witty score embraces the banal requirements of banquet-hall musicianship ("Feelings" is a must) without condescension. 

Though Ms. Pfeiffer has the flashy part -- she gets the best comic bits and to wear glamorous dresses and spiked heelsthe boys are pretty great, too.
What seemed like a good idea, to cast the Bridges brothers (Jeff and Beau) as the Baker brothers, actually turned out to be a good idea.
Anyone who's tried to appear "natural" in front of a camera knows that it's much more natural to end up looking like a stiff.
So it's quite possible that the terrific play between the brothers isn't natural at all, that Jeff and Beau had to work like crazy to make their brotherly love -- and resentment and frustration and rage -- seem so very real. 

When the movie opens the Baker brothers are doing what they've done for 15 years professionally, and twice as long as that for themselves: They're playing proficient piano, face-to-face, on twin pianos.
They're small time in the small time-hotels (not the best ones) and restaurants in Seattle.
Yet they don't disparage their audiences by disparaging their act.
They wear tuxedos most nights, unless circumstances (a regular gig at a "tropical" lounge, for example) require them to wear special costumes, like Hawaiian shirts. 

Plump Beau, looking eager to please with his arched eyebrows and round face, plays the older brother, Frank.
Frank plans the program, takes care of business, and approaches the work like any other job.
He's even able to think of a job that takes him out of the house 300 nights a week as an ordinary job.
He's got a wife and two kids and a house in the suburbs; the audience sees only the house, and only near the end of the movie.
Frank grovels a little for the bookers, probably no more or less than he would have to if he worked for a big corporation.
On his off-hours he wears cardigan sweaters. 

Jeff Bridges is the younger brother, Jack, who fancies himself the rebellious artist; he lives in a loft with his sick dog and the occasional visit from the little girl upstairs, who climbs down the fire escape.
Yet Jack's the one who can remember every dive they ever played, and when, and he dutifully shows up for work night after night (he consoles himself with booze and by showing up at the last minute).
Looking leaner than he has in a while, the younger Mr. Bridges's Jack is sexy and cynical and a far sadder case than Frank, who's managed to chisel his dreams to fit reality without feeling too cheated.
He can live with little pleasures. 

Mr. Kloves has put together some priceless moments.
These include Jennifer Tilly's audition to be the Baker Boys' girl singer.
Ms. Tilly of the tweety-bird voice showed great comic promise during her stint as the mobster's girlfriend on the television show, "Hill Street Blues." Here she delivers, especially during her enthusiastically awful rendition of the "Candy Man," which she sings while prancing around in a little cotton candy pink angora sweater that couldn't be more perfect. (It matches her voice.) And Ms. Pfeiffer's particular version of "Making Whoopee" -- and the way Mr. Ballhaus photographs her, from the tips of her red high heels right up her clingy red velvet dress -- might make you think of Marilyn Monroe if Ms. Pfeiffer hadn't gone and become a star in her own right. 

VIDEO TIP: If you'd like to see the first time Michelle Pfeiffer sang on screen, and you have a lot of patience, take a look at "Grease 2." You'll find her there.
Better yet, check out the emergence of her comic persona in "Married to the Mob," Jonathan Demme's delightful Mafia comedy. 

