.START 

Senate Republicans have settled on a proposal that would cut the capital-gains tax for individuals and corporations. 

At the same time, a small group of Senate Democrats are working on a similar plan and may introduce it soon. 

Sen. Bob Packwood (R., Ore.), the lead sponsor of the GOP proposal, said he intends to unveil the plan today and to offer it as an amendment to whatever legislation comes along, particularly this month's bill to raise the federal borrowing limit. 

He gave 10-to-1 odds that a capital-gains tax cut of some sort would be approved this year, though it probably won't be included in the pending deficit-reduction bill.
He added that he expects to talk to the Democrats who also wanted to cut the gains tax about drafting a joint proposal. 

For individuals, the Packwood plan would exclude from income 5% of the gain from the sale of a capital asset held for more than one year.
The exclusion would rise five percentage points for each year the asset was held until it reached a maximum of 35%.
The exclusion would apply to assets sold after Oct. 1, 1989.
As an alternative, he said, taxpayers could chose to reduce their gains by an inflation index. 

For corporations, the top tax rate on the sale of assets held for more than three years would be cut to 33% from the current top rate of 34%.
That rate would gradually decline to as little as 29% for corporate assets held for 15 years. 

The Packwood plan would also include a proposal, designed by Sen. William Roth (R., Del.), that would expand and alter the deduction for individual retirement accounts.
The Roth plan would create a new, non-deductible IRA from which money could be withdrawn tax-free not only for retirement, but also for the purchase of a first home and to pay education and medical expenses.
Current IRAs could be rolled over into the new IRAs but would be subject to tax. 

For their part, the group of Democrats are working on a plan that, like the Packwood proposal, would grant larger exclusions to assets the longer they were held by individuals and companies.
Newly acquired assets would get a bigger break than those currently held.
An extra exclusion would be given to long-held stock in small and medium-size corporations just starting up. 

No one in the Senate is considering the capital-gains plan passed by the House.
That plan would provide a 30% exclusion to assets sold over a 2 1/2-year period ending Dec. 31, 1991.
After then, the House measure would boost the tax rate to 28% and exclude from tax the gain attributable to inflation.
Senators are focusing on making a capital-gains differential permanent. 

Separately, Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) of the House Ways and Means Committee said he didn't want the capital-gains tax cut or any other amendments attached to the pending bill raising the federal borrowing limit.
The current debt limit expires Oct. 31. 

He also urged House and Senate negotiators to rid the deficit-reduction bill of all provisions that increase the budget deficit, including the House-passed capital-gains provision. 

