.START 

Program traders were buying and selling at full steam Monday, the first trading session after the stock market's 190.58-point plunge Friday. 

They accounted for a hefty 16% of New York Stock Exchange volume Monday, the fourth busiest session ever.
On Friday, 13% of volume was in computer-guided program trades.
In August, by contrast, program trading averaged 10.3% of daily Big Board turnover. 

Program traders were publicly castigated following the 508-point crash Oct. 19, 1987, and a number of brokerage firms pulled back from using this strategy for a while.
But as the outcry faded by the spring of 1988, they resumed.
Some observers thought that after Friday's sharp drop, the firms would rein in their program traders to avoid stoking more controversy. 

But the statistics released yesterday show the firms did nothing of the sort.
One reason, they said, was that the official reports on the 1987 crash exonerated program trading as a cause. 

Stock-index arbitrage is the most controversial form of program trading because it accelerates market moves, if not actually causing them.
In it, traders buy or sell stocks and offset those positions in stock-index futures contracts to profit from fleeting price discrepancies.
Under the exchange's definitions, program trading also describes a number of other strategies that, in the opinion of some traders, don't cause big swings in the market. 

The Big Board's disclosure of program trading activity on these two days was unusual.
Though it collects such data daily, its monthly reports on program trading usually come out about three weeks after each month ends.
The September figures are due to be released this week. 

The Big Board declined to name the Wall Street firms involved in the activity Friday and Monday, or the type of strategies used.
But traders on the exchange floor, who can observe the computer-guided trading activity on monitor screens, said most of the top program-trading firms were active both days. 

Through August, the top five program trading firms in volume were Morgan Stanley & Co., Kidder, Peabody & Co., Merrill Lynch & Co., PaineWebber Group Inc. and Salomon Brothers Inc. 

Though brokerage officials defended their use of program trading, one sign of what an issue it remains was that few executives would comment on the record.
Besides reciting the pardon for program trading contained in the Brady Commission report, they said stock-index arbitrage was actually needed Monday to restore the markets' equilibrium. 

On Friday, the stock-index futures market was unhinged from the stock market when the Chicago Mercantile Exchange halted trading in Standard & Poor's 500 futures contract -- a "circuit breaker" procedure instituted after the 1987 crash and implemented for the first time.
Futures trading resumed a half-hour later, but the session ended shortly thereafter, leaving the stock market set up for more sell programs, traders said.
By Monday morning, they said, stock-index arbitrage sell programs helped re-establish the link between stocks and futures. 

But stunning volatility was produced in the process.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged a breathtaking 63.52 points in the first 40 minutes of trading Monday as stock-index arbitrage sell programs kicked in.
At about 10:10 a.m. EDT, the market abruptly turned upward on stock-index arbitrage buy programs.
By day's end, the Dow industrials had rebounded 88.12 points, or nearly half of Friday's drop. 

