.START 

Two years of coddling, down the drain. 

That's the way a lot of brokers feel today on the second anniversary of the 1987 stock-market crash. 

Ever since that fearful Black Monday, they've been tirelessly wooing wary individual investors -- trying to convince them that Oct. 19, 1987, was a fluke and that the stock market really is a safe place for average Americans to put their hard-earned dollars. 

And until last Friday, it seemed those efforts were starting to pay off. "Some of those folks were coming back," says Leslie Quick Jr., chairman, of discount brokers Quick & Reilly Group Inc. "We had heard from people who hadn't been active" for a long time. 

Then came the frightening 190-point plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average and a new wave of stock-market volatility.
All of a sudden, it was back to square one. 

"It's going to set things back for a period, because it reinforces the concern of volatility," says Jeffrey B. Lane, president of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. "I think it will shake confidence one more time, and a lot of this business is based on client confidence." 

Brokers around the country say the reaction from individual investors this week has been almost eerie.
Customers and potential customers are suddenly complaining about the stock market in the exact way they did in post-crash 1987. 

"The kinds of questions you had before have resurfaced," says Raymond A. "Chip" Mason, chairman of regional brokerage firm Legg Mason Inc., Baltimore. "I can just tell the questions are right back where they were: `What's going on?,' `Can't anything be done about program trading?,' `Doesn't the exchange understand?,' `Where is the SEC on this? '" 

Mr. Mason says he's convinced the public still wants to invest in common stocks, even though they believe the deck is stacked against them.
But "these wide swings scare them to death." All of this is bad news for the big brokerage firms such as Shearson and Merrill Lynch & Co. that have big "retail," or individual-investor, businesses.
After expanding rapidly during the bull-market years up to the 1987 crash, retail brokerage operations these days are getting barely enough business to pay the overhead. 

True, the amount of money investors are willing to entrust to their brokers has been growing lately.
But those dollars have been going into such "safe" products as money market funds, which don't generate much in the way of commissions for the brokerage firms.
At discount brokerage Charles Schwab & Co., such "cash-equivalent" investments recently accounted for a record $8 billion of the firm's $25 billion of client's assets. 

The brokers' hope has been that they could soon coax investors into shifting some of their hoard into the stock market.
And before last Friday, they were actually making modest progress. 

A slightly higher percentage of New York Stock Exchange volume has been attributed to retail investors in recent months compared with post-crash 1988, according to Securities Industry Association data.
In 1987, an average 19.7% of Big Board volume was retail business, with the monthly level never more than 21.4%.
The retail participation dropped to an average 18.2% in 1988, and shriveled to barely 14% some months during the year. 

Yet in 1989, retail participation has been more than 20% in every month, and was 23.5% in August, the latest month for which figures are available. 

Jeffrey Schaefer, the SIA's research director, says that all of his group's retail-volume statistics could be overstated by as much as five percentage points because corporate buy-backs are sometimes inadvertently included in Big Board data.
But there did seem to be a retail activity pickup. 

But "Friday didn't help things," says Mr. Schaefer. 

With the gyrations of recent days, says Hugo Quackenbush, senior vice president at Charles Schwab, many small investors are absolutely convinced that "they shouldn't play in the stock market." 

Joseph Grano, president of retail sales and marketing at PaineWebber Group Inc., still thinks that individual investors will eventually go back into the stock market.
Investors will develop "thicker skins," and their confidence will return, he says.
Friday's plunge, he is telling PaineWebber brokers, was nothing more than a "tremendous reaction to leveraged buy-out stocks." 

Meanwhile, PaineWebber remains among the leaders in efforts to simply persuade investors to keep giving Wall Street their money. "It's more of an important issue to keep control of those assets, rather than push the investor to move into (specific) products such as equities," Mr. Grano says. "The equity decision will come when the client is ready and when there's a semblance of confidence." 

It could be a long wait, say some industry observers. "Some investors will tiptoe back in," says Richard Ross, a market research director for Elrick & Lavidge in Chicago. "Then there'll be another swing.
Given enough of these, this will drive everyone out except the most hardy," he adds. 

Mr. Ross, who has been studying retail investors' perception of risks in the brokerage industry, said a market plunge like Friday's "shatters investors' confidence in their ability to make any judgments on the market." The long-term outlook for the retail brokerage business is "miserable," Mr. Ross declares. 

