.START 

As the citizens of San Francisco and surrounding communities began assessing the damage from Tuesday's devastating earthquake, NBC News began assessing the damage from what some said was a failure to provide comprehensive coverage in the earthquake's initial moments. 

"In terms of coverage, it was a disaster equal to the earthquakes," said Eric Premner, president for broadcasting of King Broadcasting Co., which owns the NBC affiliate in Seattle, Wash. 

While rival ABC News outstripped the competition in live coverage of the event by sheer luck -- the network was broadcasting the World Series from Candlestick Park when the quake struck -- NBC News was unable to get its signal out of San Francisco for the first hour after the quake. 

"I have to attribute the lackluster performance to a natural disaster," said Mr. Premner. "So before I start to be really critical of NBC, I would like to know more about what happened." 

There were no complaints from affiliates of CBS Inc. and Cable News Network, a unit of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. 

But that was not the case at NBC News, which has been dogged with the image of not being aggressive on major breaking stories.
Last summer, the affiliates bitterly complained to network executives about the poor coverage of the student uprising in China. 

"I was not pleased with the slow start, and neither was NBC News," said Guy Hempel, general manager of NBC affiliate WAVE in Louisville, Ky. 

A spokesman for National Broadcasting Co., a unit of General Electric Co., said the network was "looking into what happened." The stations said they were pleased with the extended coverage yesterday, including a special five-hour edition of "Today." 

Don Browne, director of news at NBC News, said in an interview that "we couldn't get a signal out of San Francisco.
We were out of the box.
It was horrible.
The comment we're hearing is that we were slow out of the box, but beat everyone else in the stretch." 

NBC broadcast throughout the entire night and did not go off the air until noon yesterday. 

The quake postponed the third and fourth games of the World Series.
In place of the games, ABC said it planned to broadcast next week's episodes of its prime-time Wednesday and Thursday lineups, except for a one-hour special on the earthquake at 10 p.m. last night.
The series is scheduled to resume Tuesday evening in San Francisco. 

"There are no commercials to make up for since we're going to eventually broadcast the World Series," said a network spokesman. 

