.START 

Natural upheavals, and most particularly earthquakes, are not only horrible realities in and of themselves, but also symbols through which the state of a society can be construed.
The rubble after the Armenian earthquake a year ago disclosed, quite literally, a city whose larger structures had been built with sand.
The extent of the disaster stemmed from years of chicanery and bureaucratic indifference. 

The larger parallel after the earthquake centered south of San Francisco is surely with the state of the U.S. economy.
Did the stock-market tremors of Friday, Oct. 13, presage larger fragility, far greater upheavals?
Are the engineering and architecture of the economy as vulnerable as the spans of the Bay Bridge? 

The eerie complacency of the Reagan-Bush era has produced Panglossian paeans about the present perfection of U.S. economic and social arrangements.
A licensed government intellectual, Francis Fukuyama, recently announced in The National Interest that history is, so to speak, at an end since the course of human progress has now culminated in the glorious full stop of American civilization.
His observations were taken seriously.
But we are, in reality, witnessing the continuing decline of the political economy of capitalism: not so much the end of history but the history of the end. 

The financial equivalent of the sand used by those Armenian contractors is junk bonds and the leveraged buy-outs associated with them.
Builders get away with using sand and financiers junk when society decides it's okay, necessary even, to look the other way.
And by the early 1980s U.S. capitalists had ample reason to welcome junk bonds, to look the other way. 

By that time they found extremely low profit rates from non-financial corporate investment.
Government statistics in fact show that the profit rate -- net pretax profits divided by capital stock -- peaked in 1965 at 17.2%.
That same calculation saw profit rates fall to 4.6% in the recession year 1982 and the supposed miracle that followed has seen the profit rate rise only to 8.1% in 1986 and 8% in 1987. 

Corresponding to the fall in profit rates was -- in the early 1980s -- the drop in the number arrived at if you divide the market value of firms by the replacement costs of their assets, the famous Q ratio associated with Prof. James Tobin.
In theory, the value attached to a firm by the market and the cost of replacing its assets should be the same.
But of course the market could decide that the firm's capital stock -- its assets -- means nothing if the firm is not producing profits.
This is indeed what the market decided.
By 1982 the ratio was 43.5%, meaning that the market was valuing every dollar's worth of the average firm's assets at 43 cents. 

From the history of capitalism we can take it as a sound bet that if it takes only 43 cents to buy a dollar's worth of a firm's capital stock, an alert entrepreneur won't look the other way.
His assumption is that the underlying profitability rate will go up and the capital assets he bought on the cheap will soon be producing profits, thus restoring the market's faith in them.
Hence the LBO craze. 

But here is where the entrepreneur made a very risky bet, and where society was maybe foolish to look the other way.
The profit rate is still low and the Q ratio was only 65% in 1987 and 68.9% in 1988.
Result: a landscape littered with lemons, huge debt burdens crushing down upon the arch and spans of corporate America. 

The mounting risks did not go unobserved, even in the mid-1980s.
But there were enough promoters announcing the end of history (in this case suspension of normal laws of economic gravity) for society to continue shielding its eyes.
Mainstream economists and commentators, craning their necks up at the great pyramids of junk financing, swiveling their heads to watch the avalanche of leveraged buy-outs, claimed the end result would be a leaner, meaner corporate America, with soaring productivity and profits and the weaker gone to the wall.
But this is not where the rewards of junk financing were found.
The beneficiaries were those financiers whose icon was the topic figure of '80s capitalism, Michael Milken's $517 million salary in one year. 

Left-stream economists I associate with -- fellows in the Union of Radical Political Economists, most particularly Robert Pollin of the economics faculty at the University of California at Riverside -- were not hypnotized in the manner of their pliant colleagues.
All along they have been noting the tremors and pointing out the underlying realities.
Profit rates after the great merger wave are no higher, and now we have an extremely high-interest burden relative to cash flow. 

The consequences of building empires with sand are showing up.
In contrast to previous estimates reckoning the default rate on junk bonds at 2% or 3%, a Harvard study published in April of this year (and discussed in a lead story in The Wall Street Journal for Sept. 18) found the default rate on these junk bonds is 34%. 

What is the consequence of a high-interest burden, high default rates and continued low profitability?
Corporations need liquidity, in the form of borrowed funds.
Without liquidity from the junk-bond market or cash flow from profits, they look to the government, which obediently assists the natural motions of the capitalist economy with charity in the form of cuts in the capital-gains tax rate or bailouts.
The consequence can be inflation, brought on as the effect of a desperate bid to avoid the deflationary shock of a sudden crash. 

Attacks on inflation come with another strategy of capital of a very traditional sort: an assault on wages.
Mr. Fukuyama, peering through binoculars at the end of history, said in his essay that "the class issue has actually been successfully resolved in the West . . . the egalitarianism of modern America represents the essential achievement of the classless society envisioned by Marx." 

Mr. Fukuyama might want to consult some American workers on the subject of class and egalitarianism.
From its peak in 1972 of $198.41, the average American weekly wage had fallen to $169.28 in 1987 -- both figures being expressed in 1977 dollars.
In other words, after the glory boom of the Reagan years, wages had sunk from the post World War II peak by 16% as capitalists, helped by the government, turned down the screws or went offshore. 

But there are signs now -- the strikes by miners, Boeing workers, telephone workers, etc. -- that this attack on wages is being more fiercely resisted. 

These are long-term Richter readings on American capitalism.
The whole structure is extremely shaky.
Governments have become sophisticated in handling moments of panic (a word the London Times forbade my father to use when he was reporting the Wall Street crash in 1929).
But sophistication has its limits.
The S&L bailout could cost $300 billion, computing interest on the government's loans.
These are real costs.
Under what weights will the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation totter?
Capitalism may now be engineered to withstand sudden shocks, but there are fault lines -- the crisis in profits, the assault on wages, the structural inequity of the system -- that make fools of those who claim that the future is here and that history is over. 

Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation and LA Weekly. 

