.START 

B.A.T Industries PLC may delay aspects of its defensive restructuring plan -- including the sale of its Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field units -- in the wake of the current upheaval in financial markets, company officials said. 

The British conglomerate, planning its own defensive restructuring to fight off a #13.35 billion ($21.03 billion) takeover bid by Anglo-French financier Sir James Goldsmith, intends to press ahead with an extraordinary shareholder vote today to clear the way for its value-boosting measures.
If anything, the gyrations in world stock markets -- and in B.A.T's share price -- since last Friday's sharp Wall Street sell-off have increased the likelihood of shareholder approval for the restructuring, analysts and several big institutional holders said. "Thank God we have some deal on the table," said Stewart Gilchrist, a director at Scottish Amicable Investment Managers, which intends to vote its roughly 1% stake in favor of the restructuring. 

Investors in B.A.T have been on a roller coaster.
B.A.T has been London's best-performing blue chip over the past six months, up 40% against a 4% rise in the Financial Times 100-Share Index.
But this week, B.A.T has been hit harder than other big U.K. stocks -- first by the market gyrations, then by Tuesday's San Francisco earthquake, which could leave B.A.T's Farmers Group Inc. insurance unit facing big claims.
B.A.T rose five pence (eight cents) to 756 pence ($11.91) in London yesterday as a late market rally erased a 28-pence fall earlier in the day. 

To fight off predators, B.A.T plans to spin off about $6 billion in assets, largely by selling such U.S. retailing units as Marshall Field and Saks and by floating its big paper and U.K. retailing business via share issues to existing holders.
Proceeds will help pay for a planned buy-back of 10% of its shares and a 50% dividend increase. 

"I think the restructuring will get the required support," said Michael Pacitti, an analyst at London stockbroker UBS Phillips & Drew. "The shareholders effectively will support the share price by clearing the share buy-back." 

But B.A.T's restructuring, which was never going to happen quickly, now will take longer because of the market upheaval.
Company officials, holders and analysts who previously expected the disposals to be substantially complete by the end of next year's first half now say the market gyrations could delay the actions well into the second half. "We aren't forced sellers.
We don't have an absolute deadline and if market conditions are truly awful we might decide it is not the right time," to take particular steps, said Michael Prideaux, a B.A.T spokesman. 

Even if B.A.T receives approval for the restructuring, the company will remain in play, say shareholders and analysts, though the situation may unfold over the next 12 months, rather than six.
The new B.A.T will be a smaller tobacco and financial-services hybrid whose price-earnings ratio may more closely reflect the lower-growth tobacco business than the higher-multiple financial-services business, these holders believe.
Thus B.A.T's restructuring may only make the company a more manageable target for other corporate predators -- possibly such acquisitive bidders as Hanson PLC. 

"The last few days will surely slow down the pace of events," says Scottish Amicable's Mr. Gilchrist. "But I wouldn't write off" Sir James or other potential bidders. 

Among possible delays, the sales of Saks and Marshall Field -- which were expected to be on the block soon after the crucial Christmas season -- may slide into the second quarter or second half.
Analysts estimate that sales of the two businesses could raise roughly $2 billion. 

B.A.T isn't predicting a postponement because the units "are quality businesses and we are encouraged by the breadth of inquiries," said Mr. Prideaux.
But the delay could happen if B.A.T doesn't get adequate bids, he said. 

People familiar with B.A.T say possible acquirers for the units include managers from both retailing chains, and General Cinema Corp., which is interested in bidding for Saks.
Other potential bidders for parts of B.A.T's U.S. retail unit include Dillard Department Stores Inc., May Department Stores Co. and Limited Inc. B.A.T has declined to identify the potential bidders. 

Though Sir James has said he intends to mount a new bid for B.A.T once approval from U.S. insurance regulators is received, jitters over prospects for junk-bond financing and U.S. leverage buy-outs are making investors more skeptical about Sir James's prospects.
His initial offer indicated he needed to raise as much as 80% of the takeover financing through the debt markets. 

Market uncertainty also clouds the outlook for B.A.T's attracting a premium price for its U.S. retailing properties.
Finally, Tuesday's California earthquake initially knocked 3.7% off B.A.T's share price in London yesterday because of fears of the potential claims to Los Angeles-based Farmers, which has a substantial portion of its property and casualty exposure in California. 

On Farmers, Mr. Prideaux said it is too early to quantify the level of potential claims.
He added B.A.T "has no expectation of a material impact on Farmers." 

