.START 

whose Della Femina McNamee WCRS agency created liar Joe Isuzu, among others -- announced a massive restructuring that largely removes it from the advertising business and includes selling the majority of its advertising unit to Paris-based Eurocom. 

The complex restructuring, which was long expected, transforms London-based WCRS from primarily a creator of advertising into one of Europe's largest buyers of advertising time and space.
It also creates a newly merged world-wide ad agency controlled by Eurocom and headed jointly by New York ad man Jerry Della Femina and two top WCRS executives.
The merged agency's admittedly ambitious goal: to become one of the world's 10 largest agencies, while attracting more multinational clients than the agencies were able to attract alone. 

WCRS's restructuring reflects the growing importance of media buying in Europe, where the only way to get a good price on advertising time and space is to buy it in bulk.
For Eurocom, meanwhile, the move gives it a strong U.S. foothold in Della Femina, and more than quadruples the size of its ad agency business world-wide.
It also gives the outspoken Mr. Della Femina -- who often generates as much publicity for himself as for his clients -- an international platform that he most certainly won't be loath to use. 

According to terms, WCRS will pay 2.02 billion French francs ($318.6 million) for the 50% it doesn't already own of Carat Holding S.A., one of Europe's largest media buyers.
Meanwhile, Eurocom, which had held 20% of WCRS's ad unit, will pay #43.5 million ($68.5 million) to raise its stake to 60%.
That price also covers Eurocom raising to 60% its 51% stake in Europe's Belier Group, a joint venture ad agency network it owns with WCRS. Eurocom will also have the right to buy the remaining 40% of the merged ad agency group in six years. 

The transaction places the three executives squarely at the helm of a major agency with the rather unwieldy name of Eurocom WCRS Della Femina Ball Ltd., or EWDB.
The merged agency will include Della Femina McNamee based in New York, Eurocom's various agencies in France, the Belier Group in Europe and WCRS's other advertising and direct marketing operations. 

Mr. Della Femina will be joint chairman with former WCRS executive Robin Wight.
Both will report to Tim Breene, a former WCRS executive who will be chief executive officer at the new agency. 

In an interview in New York, Mr. Breene, fresh from a Concorde flight from Paris where executives had worked through most of the night, outlined big plans for the new agency. "Our goal is to develop quite rapidly to a top-10 position . . . by the end of three years from now.
It implies very dramatic growth," he said.
He added that Eurocom and WCRS had agreed to provide a development fund of #100 million for acquisitions.
The new agency group is already in discussions about a possible purchase in Spain, while Mr. Breene said it also plans to make acquisitions in Scandinavia, Germany and elsewhere. 

Cracking the top 10 within three years will be difficult at best.
Della Femina had billings of just $660 million last year and ranked as the U.S.'s 24th-largest ad agency.
The merged company that it now becomes part of will have billings of just more than $2.6 billion -- most of that in Europe -- bringing it to about 14th world-wide.
To make it to top-10 status, it would have to leapfrog over such formidable forces as Grey Advertising, D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles and Omnicom's DDB Needham. 

The merged agency's game plan to attract multinational packaged-goods advertisers may prove equally difficult.
When WCRS created Della Femina McNamee out of the merger of three smaller agency units in 1988, it said it did so in order to attract larger clients, especially packaged-goods companies.
Since then, Della Femina won Pan Am as an international client and also does work for a few packaged-goods clients, including Dow Chemical Co. 's Saran Wrap. 

But major packaged-goods players of the world -- such as Procter & Gamble, Colgate-Palmolive and Unilever -- have steadfastly eluded the agency. "Three of our favorite names," Mr. Della Femina calls that roster, adding hopefully, "We're a much more attractive agency to large multinationals today than we were yesterday." 

Still, the restructuring could create one of the most powerful alliances between advertising and media-buying firms that Europe has seen.
As part of the restructuring, WCRS and Eurocom said they will look for ways to combine their media buying across Europe. 

What's more, both Eurocom and brothers Francis and Gilbert Gross, who founded Carat, will acquire 14.99% stakes in WCRS Group, creating a powerful link between Eurocom and Carat.
Carat will receive its WCRS stake as part of payment for the 50% Carat stake that WCRS is buying, while Eurocom said it expects to pay about #32 million for its WCRS stake. 

Mr. Della Femina says he plans to remain heavily involved in the creative product at the world-wide agency, serving as a sort of "creative conscience." Louise McNamee, Della Femina's president, will continue running the U.S. agency day-to-day.
They and other top executives signed long-term employment contracts and Mr. Della Femina will receive an additional multimillion-dollar sum, which some industry executives pegged at about $10 million. 

WCRS Group, for its part, will now be able to follow its longstanding plan of becoming "a holding company for a series of media-related businesses," said Peter Scott, the firm's chief executive.
In addition to Carat, WCRS will hold onto its public relations, TV programming and other businesses.
WCRS says its debt will be cut to #24 million from #66 million as a result of the transaction. 

For Carat, meanwhile, the alliance with Eurocom and WCRS is intended to strengthen its own push outside France.
Carat's Gross brothers invented the idea of large-scale buying of media space.
By buying the space in bulk, they obtain discounts as high as 50%, which they can pass on to customers.
They thus have won the French space-buying business of such advertising giants as Coca-Cola Co., Fiat S.p.A., Gillette and Kodak.
But now, other agencies are getting into the business with their own competing media-buying groups -- and Carat wants to expand to the rest of Europe. 

To help finance the Carat purchase, WCRS said it plans an issue of Euroconvertible preferred shares once the market settles down.
But WCRS added that "in the light of the current uncertainty in the equity markets," it has arranged medium-term debt financing, which would be underwritten by Samuel Montagu & Co. Ltd. 

Earthquake's Damage 

Tuesday's earthquake brought the San Francisco ad scene to a screeching halt yesterday, with only a few staffers showing up at their offices, mainly to survey the damage or to wring their hands about imminent new-business presentations. 

While no agencies reported injuries to employees, the quake damaged the offices of J. Walter Thompson, Chiat/Day/Mojo and DDB Needham, among others, spokesmen for those agencies said.
Staffers at Thompson, whose offices are in the ultramodern Embarcadero Center, watched pictures drop from the walls and then felt the skyscraper sway seven to eight feet, according to a spokeswoman.
Plaster fell and windows were broken at Chiat/Day/Mojo, a spokesman for that agency said. 

Late yesterday afternoon, DDB Needham executives were scrambling to figure out what to do about a new business presentation that had been scheduled for today, a spokesman said.
DDB Needham's office building may have sustained structural damage, the spokesman added. "All operations have stopped," he said.
A number of agencies, including Thompson and Foote, Cone & Belding, said some employees who live outside of San Francisco, fearful that they wouldn't be able to get home, spent the night at the agency. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNT: Chesebrough-Pond's Inc., Greenwich, Conn., awarded its Faberge hair care accounts to J. Walter Thompson, New York.
Thompson, a unit of WPP Group, will handle Faberge Organic shampoo and conditioner and Aqua Net hairspray.
The accounts, which billed about $7 million last year, according to Leading National Advertisers, were previously handled at Bozell, New York. 

WHO'S NEWS: William Morrissey, 44, was named executive vice president, world-wide director of McCann Direct, the direct marketing unit of Interpublic Group's McCann-Erickson agency.
He had been president and chief operating officer of Ogilvy & Mather Direct. 

BOZELL: Los Angeles will be the site of a new entertainment division for the ad agency.
The division will be headed by Dick Porter, who returns to Bozell after being vice president of media at MGM. 

AC&R ADVERTISING: The agency's three California offices, previously called AC&R/CCL Advertising, will now be called AC&R Advertising to match the name of its New York office.
AC&R Advertising is a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co. 

NEW BEER: Sibra Products Inc., Greenwich, Conn., awarded its Cardinal Amber Light beer account to Heidelberg & Associates, New York.
Budget is set at $1.5 million.
The new beer, introduced this week at a liquor industry convention, is imported from Switzerland's Cardinal brewery.
Heidelberg's first ads for the brand, which Sibra says will compete with imported light beer leader Amstel Light, feature the line "The best tasting light beer you've ever seen." 

