.START 

Congress sent President Bush an $18.4 billion fiscal 1990 Treasury and Postal Service bill providing $5.5 billion for the Internal Revenue Service and increasing the Customs Service's air-interdiction program nearly a third. 

Final approval came on a simple voice vote in the Senate, and the swift passage contrasted with months of negotiations over the underlying bill which is laced with special-interest provisions for both members and the executive branch. 

An estimated $33 million was added for university and science grants, including $1.5 million for Smith College.
And Southwest lawmakers were a driving force behind $54.6 million for U.S.-Mexico border facilities, or more than double the administration's request. 

More than $1.8 million is allocated for pensions and expenses for former presidents, and the budget for the official residence of Vice President Quayle is more than doubled, with $200,000 designated for improvements to the property.
Even the Office of Management and Budget is remembered with an extra $1 million to help offset pay costs that other government departments are being asked to absorb. 

Within the IRS, nearly $1.95 billion is provided for processing tax returns, a 12% increase over fiscal 1989 and double what the government was spending five years ago.
Investigation and taxpayer service accounts would grow to $1.6 billion, and Congress specifically added $7.4 million for stepped up criminal investigations of money laundering related to drug traffic. 

The large increase in Customs Service air-interdiction funds is also intended to counter smuggling, and the annual appropriations level has more than quadrupled in five years.
The $196.7 million provided for fiscal 1990 anticipates the purchase of a Lockheed P-3 surveillance aircraft and five Cessna Citation II jets.
Despite administration reservations, the plan has had the quiet backing of customs officials as well as influential lawmakers from Cessna's home state, Kansas. 

Among legislative provisions attached to the bill is a ban on any Treasury Department expenditure for enforcement of a 1986 tax provision intended to counter discrimination in employee-benefit plans.
Small-business interests have lobbied against the so-called Section 89 tax rules.
Repeal is considered likely now, but the Treasury Department bill has been used as a vehicle to raise the profile of the issue and block any action in the interim. 

Less noticed is a bit of legislative legerdemain by Houston Republicans on behalf of HEI Corp. of Texas to retroactively "move" a Missouri hospital from one county to the next to justify higher Medicare reimbursements.
The provision seeks to wipe out an estimated $1.4 million in claims made by the Health Care Finance Administration against HEI, which owned the hospital in Sullivan, Mo., during most of the four-year period -- 1983-1987 -- covered in the amendment. 

In a separate development, a private meeting is scheduled this morning between House Appropriations Committee Chairman Jamie Whitten (D., Miss.) and Sen. Dale Bumpers (D., Ark.) in an effort to end a dispute which for two weeks has delayed action on an estimated $44 billion agriculture bill.
A House-Senate conference reached agreement Oct. 5 on virtually all major provisions of the bill, but final settlement has been stalled because of differences between the two men over the fate of a modest Arkansas-based program to provide technical information to farmers seeking to reduce their dependence on chemical fertilizers and pesticides. 

The program's nonprofit sponsors received $900,000 in fiscal 1989 through an Extension Service grant, but Mr. Whitten has been adamant in insisting that the program be cut in 1990.
The 79-year-old Mississippian takes a more orthodox, entrenched view of agriculture policy than those in the movement to reduce chemical use, but as a master of pork-barrel politics, he is believed to be annoyed as well that the project moved to Arkansas from a Tennessee center near Memphis and the northern Mississippi border. 

