.START 

Four years ago, Pittsburgh was designated the most-livable U.S. city by Rand McNally's Places Rated Almanac, and the honor did wonders to improve Pittsburgh's soot-stained image. 

"People asked, is it really true?" says Maury Kelley, vice president, marketing services, for Beecham Products USA, a maker of health and personal-care products that used the ranking in its recruiting brochure. 

Yuba City, Calif., meanwhile, ranked dead last among 329 metro areas.
Unamused, residents burned Rand McNally books and wore T-shirts that said: "Kiss my Atlas." 

The almanac will be making new friends and enemies on Oct. 27, when an updated version will be released. 

Pittsburgh figures it will be dethroned but plans to accept its ouster graciously.
The city's Office of Promotion plans media events to welcome its successor. 

"We're encouraging a graceful transition," says Mary Kay Poppenberg, the organization's president. "Our attitude is that (the ranking) is like Miss America.
Once you're Miss America, you're always Miss America." 

Tell that to Atlanta, which Pittsburgh replaced as the most-livable city in 1985.
Many Atlantans thought Pittsburgh was an unworthy heir.
A columnist in the Atlanta Journal and Constitution wrote: "Who did the research for this report?
Two guys from Gary, Ind.?" 

Not so.
Co-authors David Savageau and Richard Boyer, live in Gloucester, Mass., and Asheville, N.C., respectively. "Atlanta," Mr. Savageau sniffs, "has unrealistic pretensions to world-class status." 

The new edition lists the top 10 metropolitan areas as Anaheim-Santa Ana, Calif.; Boston; Louisville, Ky.; Nassau-Suffolk, N.Y.; New York; Pittsburgh; San Diego; San Francisco; Seattle; and Washington.
Mr. Savageau says earthquake or not, San Francisco makes the list. 

But attention also rivets on who finishes last, and Pine Bluff, Ark. -- which finished third to last in 1981 and second to last in 1985 -- is certainly in the running. 

"I hate to dignify the publication by commenting on the obscene rating," Mayor Carolyn Robinson says, adding that cities have no way to rebut the book. "It's like fighting your way out of a fog.
You don't know which way to punch." 

