.START 

AMR Corp. posted an 8.8% drop in third-quarter net income and said the fourth quarter will be "disappointing" as well, primarily because of slimmer profit margins and increased fuel costs. 

AMR's earnings decline comes a year after the parent company of American Airlines and the rest of the airline industry set profit records.
Some analysts say the latest results only seem pale by comparison with a spectacular second half of 1988. 

Still, AMR's stumble doesn't bode well for the rest of the industry.
The Fort Worth, Texas, company is generally regarded as one of the best-run in the business, and its difficulties are likely to be reflected industrywide as other major carriers report third-quarter results over the next several days. 

Meanwhile, the company's board, which had said nothing publicly about investor Donald Trump's recently withdrawn $7.5 billion offer for AMR, issued a statement condemning "ill-conceived and reckless" bids and saying it was "pleased" that Mr. Trump had backed out. 

In the third quarter, AMR said, net fell to $137 million, or $2.16 a share, from $150.3 million, or $2.50 a share.
Revenue rose 17% to $2.73 billion from $2.33 billion a year earlier. 

AMR's chairman, Robert L. Crandall, said the results were due to an 11% year-to-year increase in fuel prices and a slight decrease in yield, an industry measure analogous to profit margin on each seat sold. 

"We think these trends will continue and will produce a very disappointing fourth quarter as well," he said.
Tim Pettee, an analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co., said: "The business turned faster than expected.
Costs are giving them a little bit of trouble, and the whole industry is having a pricing problem." 

For the nine months, AMR's net rose 15% to $415.9 million, or $6.59 a share, from $360.1 million, or $5.99 a share.
Revenue jumped 22% to $7.89 billion from $6.46 billion. 

AMR's board, in a statement after a regular meeting yesterday, said: "Ill-considered and reckless acquisition proposals adversely affect employee, financial and business relationships and are contrary to the best interests of AMR shareholders. . . . AMR has not been, and is not, for sale." 

Mr. Crandall said the company's current decline in earnings is exactly the kind of situation that an excessively leveraged company laden with debt from a takeover would find difficult to weather. 

"Our very disappointing third-quarter results and the discouraging outlook for the fourth quarter underscore the importance of an adequate capital base," he said. 

