.START 

In a move to prevent any dislocation in the financial markets from the California earthquake, the Securities and Exchange Commission said it temporarily reassigned options listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange to the American, New York and Philadelphia stock exchanges and to the Chicago Board Options Exchange. 

The decision, which affects millions of dollars of trading positions, was made late yesterday because the Pacific exchange's options floor was shut down as a result of Tuesday's earthquake.
The SEC, faced with a major squeeze on options positions, said it was necessary to ensure that options listed on the exchange could be traded today and tomorrow. 

SEC Chairman Richard Breeden said the cooperation by the exchanges would enable investors to buy and sell options listed solely on the Pacific exchange, guaranteeing the liquidity of the market. 

Officials at the four exchanges said well over 50 traders from the Pacific exchange were taking flights from San Francisco late yesterday to the American, New York and Philadelphia exchanges and to the CBOE, where they would continue making markets in the Pacific-listed options.
The Big Board said carpenters quickly erected a new options floor to accomodate 40 traders from the Pacific exchange.
In addition, specialists on the exchanges agreed to provide backup capital for market-making in Pacific exchange options traded on the exchanges. 

Trading was light on the Pacific Stock Exchange yesterday, with workers at the exchange's main floor in San Francisco struggling to execute orders by flashlight as a result of a continuing power outage. 

The most pressing problem was the suspension of options trading.
The Pacific exchange has options for 129 underlying stock issues, including highly active Hilton Hotels Corp., which is listed on the Big Board.
Investors were concerned that they might be unable to exercise options that expire tomorrow. 

But professionals said throughout the day that the shutdown wouldn't be a cause for alarm even if it were to persist for several days. "I've told my staff and clients that they still have the ability to exercise their options, because they are guaranteed by the Options Clearing Corp.," said Michael Schwartz, a senior registered options strategist at Oppenheimer & Co. 

The SEC reassigned trading in the options, however, to allow investors to do more than simply exercise the options. 

While the exchange's equities floor in San Francisco remained open on a limited basis, orders were being routed and executed in Los Angeles.
Workers could dial out, but they couldn't receive telephone calls. "It's a very uncertain situation right now," said Navin Vyas, administrative assistant of trading floor operations of the exchange, which has daily volume of about 10 million shares. 

Because the exchange's computer was rerouting orders to the exchange's trading operations in Los Angeles, "business is as usual" Mr. Vyas said. "If one city is down, the other can take over." 

Meanwhile, the brokerage firms in San Francisco were trying to cope.
Charles Daggs, chairman and chief executive officer of Sutro & Co., said traders came to work at 5 a.m. PDT -- many on foot because of uncertain road and traffic conditions -- but learned that they would have to await a required inspection by the city in order to turn the power back on at the company's two main facilities there.
That should happen by today, he said. 

Traders worked with the help of sunlight streaming through windows, despite large cracks in the walls and a lack of incoming phone calls.
Also, most of the telecommunications equipment was out.
The traders were executing municipal bond, mutual fund and other orders through a sister firm, Tucker Anthony Inc., which is also owned by John Hancock Freedom Securities but is based in New York. "We are having a regular day.
Volume is down out of San Francisco, but not out of the 11 outlying offices," Mr. Daggs added.
Sutro's Oakland office executed orders through the Sacramento office, which wasn't affected by the quake. 

Others, like Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., which has eight offices in the San Francisco area, set up an 800 number yesterday morning for customers to obtain market commentary and other help. 

At Kidder, Peabody & Co. 's Sacramento branch, Manager Janet White received calls yesterday morning from workers in San Francisco who offered to work in Sacramento.
Then she discovered that Quotron Systems Inc. 's Sacramento lines were down, because they are normally tied in through a system that goes through San Francisco.
So the Kidder brokers had to call other company offices to get quotes on stocks. 

At Quotron, the company's National Call-In Center, which swung into action for the first time last month for Hurricane Hugo, assembled a tactical team at 5 a.m. yesterday to begin rerouting lines and restore service to brokers and traders.
The company dispatched as many as 200 people in the San Francisco area to do the work, though most of the rerouting was done by computer. 

Service appeared to be down throughout the financial district in downtown San Francisco, while just parts of Oakland and San Jose were knocked out.
But Dale Irvine, director of the emergency center, said service was being restored to outlying San Francisco areas. 

In Chicago yesterday, Options Clearing confirmed that it guarantees the Pacific exchange options.
The firm also will permit its members and the public "to exercise their put and call options contracts traded on the Pacific exchange" even if the exchange is closed, said Wayne Luthringshausen, chairman of Options Clearing. (Put options give holders the right, but not the obligation, to sell a financial instrument at a specified price, while call options give holders the right, but not the obligation, to buy a financial instrument at a specified price). 

Investors and traders in Pacific exchange options "are protected to the extent that they can convert their put and call options into the underlying instrument," Mr. Luthringshausen said. "We are seeing such exercises today, in fact." 

