.START 

Money-market mutual fund assets grew at nearly three times their usual rate in the latest week, as investors opted for safety instead of the stock market. 

Money-fund assets soared $4.5 billion in the week ended Tuesday, to a record $348.4 billion, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, a Holliston, Mass.-based newsletter. 

"We were expecting it, following the fall of the Dow Friday," said Brenda Malizia Negus, editor of Money Fund Report. "It's the proverbial flight to safety." 

Despite recent declines in interest rates, money funds continue to offer better yields than other comparable investments.
The average seven-day compound yield on the 400 taxable funds tracked by IBC/Donoghue's was 8.55% in the latest week, down from 8.60%.
Compound yields assume reinvestment of dividends and that current yields continue for a year. 

Most short-term certificates of deposit are yielding about 8% or less at major banks, and the yields on Treasury bills sold at Monday's auction fell to 7.61% for three months and 7.82% for six months. 

Money-fund assets have been rising at an average rate of $1.6 billion a week in recent months, Ms. Negus said, reflecting the relatively high yields.
In the latest week, funds open to institutions alone grew by $1.8 billion. 

Some fund managers say inflows could increase in coming days as a result of stock selling in the wake of Friday's 190.58point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. "If you're selling equities, you don't start getting proceeds for five to seven days," said Frank Rachwalski, who manages the Kemper Money Market Fund. 

Neal Litvack, marketing vice president for Fidelity Investments, said inflows Friday into Fidelity's Spartan and Cash Reserves money-market funds were about twice normal levels, with about half coming from equity and junk-bond funds.
Monday and Tuesday "were lackluster in comparison," he said. 

"People aren't necessarily running scared," Mr. Litvack said. "They're maintaining their attitude toward investing, which has leaned toward the conservative recently." 

Money-fund yields tend to lag interestrate trends as portfolio managers adjust the maturities of their investments -- short-term Treasury securities, commercial paper and the like -- to capture the highest yields.
Maturities usually are shorter when rates are rising and longer when they are falling. 

The average maturity of the funds tracked by IBC/Donoghue's remained at 38 days for the third consecutive week.
It was as short as 29 days at the start of this year, when rates were marching steadily upward, and hit 42 days in August. 

The average seven-day simple yield of the funds fell to 8.21% this week from 8.26%.
The average 30-day simple yield was 8.26%, compared with 8.27% the week before, and the 30-day compound yield slid to 8.60% from 8.61%. 

Some funds are posting yields far higher than the average.
The highest yielding taxable fund this week was Harbor Money Market Fund, with a seven-day compound yield of 12.75%.
That included capital gains that were passed along to customers. 

Among the other high-yielding funds, Fidelity's Spartan Fund had a seven-day compound yield of 9.33% in the latest week.
The seven-day compound yield of the Dreyfus Worldwide Dollar Fund was 9.51%. 

