.START 

The frenetic stock and bond markets cooled off, but the dollar slumped. 

Stocks rose slightly as trading activity slowed from the frenzied pace earlier this week.
Prices of long-term Treasury bonds hovered in a narrow band most of the day, finishing little changed despite the dollar's weakness and fears about a wave of government borrowing coming soon. 

Helped by futures-related program buying, the Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 4.92 points to close at 2643.65.
But the Dow Jones Transportation Average fell for the seventh-consecutive session as more investors dumped UAL shares. 

Bond prices rallied early yesterday morning as traders scrambled to buy Treasury issues on fears that the Northern California earthquake might lead to a stock-market debacle.
But when stocks held steady, Treasury bonds later retreated. 

Speculation that the Federal Reserve will lower interest rates in coming weeks helped push the dollar down while boosting stocks, traders said.
But many investors remain wary about stocks, partly because they expect continued turbulence in the junk-bond market that would make it more difficult to finance corporate takeovers. 

"I'm surprised we didn't see more volatility" in stocks, said Raymond F. DeVoe Jr., market strategist at Legg Mason Wood Walker. "I think the problems in the junk-bond area are just beginning, and this will be very unsettling for companies that have issued junk bonds.
In a bull market, credit does not matter," Mr. DeVoe added. "But when it does matter, then it's the only thing that matters." 

However, many institutional investors are reacting to the stock market's plunge as "a great buying opportunity," said Charles I. Clough, chief investment strategist at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. "Things are beginning to settle down.
The markets are returning to normalcy." 

Oil prices initially rose on fears that the massive earthquake in Northern California would disrupt production.
But prices later reversed course, finishing slightly lower, as investors concluded that any cuts wouldn't be large and that foreign oil producers would quickly pick up the slack. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices rose.
New York Stock Exchange volume shrank to 166.9 million shares from 224.1 million Tuesday.
Advancers on the Big Board outpaced decliners by 822 to 668. 

Bond prices were little changed in sluggish activity.
The yield on the Treasury's 30-year issue fell slightly to 8.03%. 

The dollar dropped.
In New York late yesterday, the currency was at 141.45 yen and 1.8485 marks, down from 142.75 yen and 1.8667 marks late Tuesday. 

