.START 

One of the most remarkable features of the forced marches of the ethnic Turks out of Bulgaria over the past five months has been the lack of international attention.
The deportation of more than 315,000 men, women and children by the Bulgarian regime adds up to one of the largest migrations seen in the postwar years.
Yet some people are advancing a chilling casuistry: that what we are seeing is somehow the understandable result of the historical sins committed by the Turks in the 16th century.
Today's Turks in Bulgaria, in other words, deserve what is coming to them four centuries later. 

As if this weren't enough, the Senate Judiciary Committee is getting into the act.
On Tuesday it approved Senator Bob Dole's proposed commemorative resolution designating April 24, 1990, as the "National Day of Remembrance of the 75th Anniversary of the Armenian Genocide of 1915-1923," suffered at the hands of the warring Ottoman Empire. 

There can be no quibbling that the Armenians endured terrible suffering, but one has to wonder what possible good such a resolution will achieve.
It puts great strain on a longstanding U.S. friendship with Turkey, a country that has been one of America's strongest allies in NATO.
The resolution also comes at a time when Turkey has been seeking help from the United States in resolving its Bulgarian emigration controversy and pursuing democratic reforms that may lead to membership in the European Community. 

Turkey has been fighting its past for years, and thus far has been only partially successful.
Must it now accept that one of its strongest allies blames it for the genocide of another people?
Such sentiment only encourages the adverse feelings toward Turkey that surfaced when Turkey asked for assistance in dealing with its Bulgarian emigration crisis. 

Mr. Dole's odd effort notwithstanding, most of Turkey's political problems lie with the Europeans.
Part of the problem some Europeans have with Turkey seems to stem from its location -- Turkey isn't really part of Europe.
Why, they wonder, should it belong to the EC?
Another anti-Turkish hook is the Islamic faith of the majority of the Turkish people: Turkey, we are told, is not a Christian nation; its people simply won't fit in with the Western European Judeo-Christian tradition.
It's when these rationalizations fall on deaf ears that the old standby of retribution for treatment at the hands of the Ottoman Empire comes to the fore. 

No one has to accept the sins of the Ottoman Empire to reject that argument.
Turkey in any event is long past it.
The country has in recent years accepted more than 500,000 refugees from at least four bordering nations.
Kurds, suffering what many people consider to be a current extermination campaign at the hands of Syria, Iran and Iraq have inundated eastern Turkey.
Now it is their fellow Turks arriving as refugees from Bulgaria. 

The Turkish refugee tragedy and the ongoing crisis cannot be ignored and shuttled off to that notorious dustbin of history that has become so convenient recently.
Surely, the past suffering of any people at any time cannot be simply filed away and forgotten.
But what the Senate Judiciary Committee has done in supporting the strongly worded Armenian resolution achieves no useful end; it merely produces more controversy and embittered memories. 

Congress has enough difficulty dealing with the realities of the world as it currently exists.
Bulgaria's government has been behaving beyond the pale for months, and the U.S. does its values no credit by ignoring that while casting its votes into the past. 

