.START 

Jaguar PLC's chairman said he hopes to reach a friendly pact with General Motors Corp. within a month that may involve the British luxury-car maker's producing a cheaper executive model. 

Sir John Egan told reporters at London's Motorfair yesterday he "would be disappointed if we couldn't do {the deal} within a month." He said the tie-up would mean Jaguar could "develop cars down range {in price} from where we are" by offering access to GM's high-volume parts production.
Besides creating joint manufacturing ventures, the accord is expected to give GM about a 15% stake that eventually would rise to about 30%. 

Jaguar figures a friendly alliance with GM will fend off unwelcome advances from Ford Motor Co.
But Ford, Jaguar's biggest shareholder since lifting its stake to 10.4% this week, is pressing harder for talks with Sir John. "We're getting to the point where we are going to have to meet" with him, one Ford official said yesterday.
Ford probably will renew its request for such a meeting soon, he added. 

Sir John has spurned Ford's advances since the U.S. auto giant launched a surprise bid for as much as 15% of Jaguar last month.
Ford has signaled it might acquire a majority interest later. "I'm not obligated to sit down and talk to anybody," the Jaguar chairman asserted yesterday.
He didn't rule out negotiations with Ford, however.
The fiercely proud but financially strapped British company prefers to remain independent and publicly held, despite Ford's promise of access to cash and technological know-how. 

Sir John noted that GM, a longtime Jaguar supplier, agrees "we should remain an independent company." He said Jaguar started negotiating with GM and several other car makers over a year ago, but the rest "dropped by the wayside ever since the share price went above #4 ($6.30) a share." Jaguar shares stood at 405 pence before Ford's initial announcement, but the subsequent takeover frenzy has driven them up.
The stock traded late yesterday on London's stock exchange at 673 pence, up 19 pence. 

Developing an executive-model range would mark a major departure for Britain's leading luxury-car maker.
A typical British executive car is mass produced and smaller than a luxury car.
It generally fetches no more than #25,000 ($39,400) -- roughly #16,000 less than the highest-priced Jaguars, which are all known for their hand-crafted leather work. 

"We have designs for such {executive} cars, but have never been able to develop them," Sir John said.
GM's help would "make it possible {for Jaguar} to build a wider range of cars." An executive model would significantly boost Jaguar's yearly output of 50,000 cars. "You are talking about a couple hundred thousand a year," said Bob Barber, an auto-industry analyst at U.K. brokerage James Capel & Co. 

A pact with GM may emerge in as little as two weeks, according to sources close to the talks.
The deal would require approval by a majority of Jaguar shareholders. "We have to make it attractive enough that {holders} would accept it," Sir John said. 

That may be difficult, the Jaguar chairman acknowledged, "when you have somebody else breathing down your neck." Ford probably would try to kill the proposal by enlisting support from U.S. takeover-stock speculators and holding out the carrot of a larger bid later, said Stephen Reitman, European auto analyst at London brokers UBS Phillips & Drew. 

Ford can't make a full-fledged bid for Jaguar until U.K. government restrictions expire.
The anti-takeover measure prevents any outside investor from buying more than 15% of Jaguar shares without permission until Dec. 31, 1990. 

But with its 10.4% stake, Ford can convene a special Jaguar shareholders' meeting and urge them to drop the restrictions prematurely. "It's a very valuable weapon in their armory," which could enable Ford to bid sooner for Jaguar, observed Mr. Barber of James Capel. 

Otherwise, Jaguar may have to tolerate the two U.S. auto giants each owning a 15% stake for more than a year. "It would be difficult to see how a car company can be owned by a collective," Sir John said. "It has never been done before, but there's always a first." 

