.START 

Michael Maynard offered the world a faster way to break eggs.
As thanks, the egg industry tried to break him. 

And the egg producers have done a pretty good job.
They tried to put Mr. Maynard out of business by an act of Congress.
Egg-industry lobbying helped persuade six states to ban Mr. Maynard's automatic egg-breaking machine because of fears over salmonella.
His company, Misa Manufacturing Inc., was forced to seek protection from creditors under federal bankruptcy law in 1987 and has since been liquidated.
Monthly sales of his Egg King machine -- which he now is marketing through a new company -- have sunk to about half a dozen from a peak of 75, says the 46-year-old businessman. 

Mr. Maynard isn't the first entrepreneur to bump up against entrenched interests.
But his case is notable both for the scale of the fight -- it isn't often that a congressional hearing is held to determine whether one small businessman is a threat to the republic -- and for what it tells about the pitfalls of marketing a new product. 

Now one might ask why people who sell eggs would fight someone who is trying to make it easier to crack them.
Part of the answer lies in the nature of the industry.
Many larger egg producers are also egg processors, who crack, inspect, and sanitize billions of eggs, turning them into powdered, liquified or frozen egg products. 

However, dozens of bakers, restaurant chefs and other food preparers who flocked to Mr. Maynard's defense say that products ranging from egg bread to eclairs lose some zip when the eggs come in 30-pound cans instead of shells.
But for companies that use hundreds of eggs a day, breaking them by hand can get, well, out of hand. 

The idea behind the Egg King is pretty simple: put the eggs into a cylinder that contains perforated baskets, spin them at a high speed to break the shells and strain the edible part through the baskets. 

One Egg King -- which at just under four feet tall and two feet wide has been likened to the robot R2-D2 -- can crack about 20,000 eggs an hour.
Because fresh eggs are less expensive than processed ones, a big egg user can recover the Egg King's $3,390 cost in a few months, says Mr. Maynard. 

Such centrifugal egg breakers have been around since the 1890s.
But when Mr. Maynard came forward with his machine in the early 1970s nobody else was offering them in the U.S.
The main reason: salmonella. 

Chickens carry this bacteria, which can cause upset stomachs and, in rare cases, death among people.
Hens sometimes pass salmonella to the eggs, and it can also be found on unclean shells.
Thus, any machine that breaks large amounts of eggs at once has the potential to spread salmonella if a bad egg gets in with the good ones. 

Mr. Maynard claims this is a manageable problem.
The Egg King carries written instructions to break only high-grade eggs that have been properly sanitized and, as an added precaution, to use the eggs only in products that will be cooked enough to kill bacteria.
With nearly 4,000 machines in use, there have been no salmonella problems as long as instructions were followed, Mr. Maynard boasts. 

He says the handful of salmonella cases involving products that may have used eggs broken by an Egg King stemmed from a failure to adequately cook the products.
But he says that's no more a reason for banning Egg Kings than bad drivers are a reason for banning cars. 

Opponents don't buy such arguments. "Human nature being what it is, people don't always follow instructions," says Jack Guzewich, chief of food protection for the New York state Health Department. 

Leading the assault against the Egg King has been United Egg Producers.
The Decatur, Ga., trade group has issued a "briefing book" that claims the machine is "a health hazard" and that Mr. Maynard is trying "to make a fast buck at the expense of the nation's egg producers." The UEP declines to comment, but the group's attorney, Alfred Frawley, says the group's actions are motivated solely by "health concerns." 

An early battleground was the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Mr. Maynard initially won approval for his machine to be used at egg-processing facilities regulated by the USDA's Food Safety Inspection Service.
Unfortunately for Mr. Maynard, another branch of the USDA, the Agricultural Marketing Service, was in charge of eggs.
After receiving complaints from egg producers, this branch got the other branch to rescind its approval, thus limiting the machine's potential market to bakeries and restaurants and other establishments that aren't regulated by the USDA. 

The egg producers also lobbied the Food and Drug Administration.
But the FDA in a 1985 letter to the United Egg Producers said that there was "little likelihood" of a health problem as long as instructions were followed. 

So the producers went to Capitol Hill, where a congressman from Georgia introduced a measure to ban centrifugal egg-breaking machines.
Mr. Maynard, whose company at the time was based in Santa Ana, Calif., enlisted his local congressman, and the battle was joined. 

Mr. Maynard's forces finally defeated the measure, though it took a vote on the floor of the House of Representatives to do it.
Even then, opponents managed to get a congressional hearing to examine what one congressman called an "unscrupulous" method for breaking eggs. 

Foiled in their effort to get a national ban, the egg producers turned their attention to the states.
So far, New York, New Jersey, Nebraska, Georgia, Michigan and Minnesota have outlawed Mr. Maynard's device, citing health concerns. 

An antitrust suit that Mr. Maynard's company filed in Los Angeles federal court against the United Egg Producers and others only added to the entrepreneur's woes.
The judge dismissed the suit and ordered Mr. Maynard's company to pay over $100,000 in legal fees to the defendants' lawyers.
Mr. Maynard says the ruling pushed his company into bankruptcy court. 

Now he has moved to Oklahoma where costs are lower, and started a new company, Adsi Inc., to market his machine.
But, so far, the change of scenery hasn't ended his string of bad breaks.
Mr. Maynard recently fell from a horse and fractured his arm. 

