.START 

Silicon Valley heaved a sigh of relief yesterday. 

Though details were sketchy in the aftermath of the violent earthquake that shook the high-tech corridor along with the rest of the San Francisco Bay area, a spot check of computer makers turned up little, if any, potentially lingering damage to facilities or fabrication equipment. 

Analysts and corporate officials said they expected practically no long-term disruption in shipments from the Valley of either hardware or software goods.
Intel Corp., Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and National Semiconductor Corp. were all up and running yesterday, though many workers were forced to stay home because of damaged roadways; others elected to take the day off. 

"These systems are more rugged than many people would believe," said Thomas Kurlak, who tracks the computer industry for Merrill Lynch Research. "It's not the end of the world if you shake them up a little bit." 

Other companies, including International Business Machines Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co., completely idled their operations because of Tuesday evening's temblor, which registered 6.9 on the Richter scale.
Personnel spent the morning inspecting buildings for structural weaknesses, mopping up water from broken pipes and clearing ceiling tiles and other debris from factory floors. 

Still, many were confident that "in a day or two, everything should be back to normal," according to a spokeswoman for the Semiconductor Industry Association, based in Cupertino.
IBM, for instance, said it anticipates returning to a normal work schedule by the weekend at its San Jose plant, which puts out disk drives for the 3090 family of mainframes.
A Hewlett-Packard spokeswoman said that, while "things are a big mess," some 18,000 Valley employees have been called back to work today. 

Apple Computer added that it was being "cautiously optimistic," despite not yet closely eyeballing all of its 50 buildings in the region.
Even the carefully calibrated machinery in its giant Fremont plant, to the north of the Valley, was believed to be undamaged.
Sun Microsystems Inc. and Tandem Computers Inc. also signaled that they should recover quickly. 

Digital Equipment Corp., with major facilities in Santa Clara, Cupertino, Palo Alto and Mountain View, said that all of its engineering and manufacturing sites had reported to corporate headquarters in Maynard, Mass., Tuesday night.
None sustained "significant" damage, a spokesman said, adding that "the delicate manufacturing process machines were checked and were all found to be operating normally." 

For many companies, of course, there is still a slew of nagging problems to grapple with, some of which have the potential to become quite serious.
For example, a spokesman for Advanced Micro Devices said the Sunnyvale chip maker is worried about blackouts.
A sudden surge or drop in electric power could ruin integrated circuits being built. 

But, given what might have happened to the fragile parts that are at the heart of the microelectronics business, the bulk of Valley companies seemed to be just about shouting hosannas. 

Several factors apparently spared the Valley -- a sprawling suburban stretch from San Jose to Palo Alto -- from the kind of impact felt in San Francisco, an hour's drive north.
For one thing, buildings there tend to be newer and, thus, in step with the latest safety codes.
Also, the soil in the Valley is solid, unlike the landfill of San Francisco's downtown Marina District, which was hit with fires and vast destruction. 

In addition, some microelectronics companies said they were prepared for tremulous conditions like Tuesday's.
Their machine tools are even bolted to the shop floor.
Intel said that over the past decade, it has installed computer sensors and shutoff valves, sensitive to the shake of an earthquake, in the pipes that snake through its plants. 

Like other large Valley companies, Intel also noted that it has factories in several parts of the nation, so that a breakdown at one location shouldn't leave customers in a total pinch. 

That's certainly good news for such companies as Compaq Computer Corp., Houston, which has only a four-day supply of microprocessors from the Valley on hand because of a just-in-time manufacturing approach that limits the buildup of inventory.
Compaq said it foresees no difficulties in obtaining parts in the immediate future. 

Computer makers were scrambling to help customers recover from the disaster.
Digital Equipment has set up disaster-recovery response centers in Dallas, Atlanta and Colorado Springs, Colo.
These units were handling calls both from people in the San Francisco area and from computers themselves, which are set to dial Digital automatically when trouble arises.
They then run remotely controlled self-diagnostic programs.
Digital also said it has dispatched teams of technicians to California. 

Meanwhile, several other major installations around the Valley -- America's center of high-tech -- said they, too, fared as well as could be expected.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, where the Energy Department tests and conducts research on nuclear weapons, had only "superficial damage," a spokesman said. 

At Lockheed Corp. 's missiles and space systems group in Sunnyvale, about 40 miles south of San Francisco, workers were asked to head to work yesterday after it was realized that "there were no show-stoppers" in the 150-plus buildings on its one-square-mile campus. 

Several engineering and research offices needed closer scrutiny to make sure they weren't in danger of crumbling, but "the bulk of the place is in pretty good shape," an official said. 

One of Lockheed's most lucrative sectors -- accounting for more than half the aerospace company's $10.59 billion in sales in 1988 -- the missiles and space group is the prime Pentagon contractor on the Trident II ballistic missile.
It also generates pieces of the missile shield called the Strategic Defense Initiative. 

Fortunately, the Hubble Space Telescope -- set to be launched on the shuttle next year in a search for distant solar systems and light emitted 14 billion years ago from the farthest reaches of the universe -- was moved from Sunnyvale to the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the beginning of October. 

John R. Wilke contribued to this article. 

