.START 

Bridge and highway collapses will disrupt truck and auto transportation in the San Francisco Bay area for months to come. 

But rail, air and ocean-shipping links to the area escaped Tuesday's earthquake with only minor damage, and many are expected to be operating normally today, government and corporate transport officials said. 

Air traffic at San Francisco International Airport was running about 50% of normal yesterday afternoon, but airport officals said they expect a return to full operations by Saturday.
The major gateway to Asia and one of the nation's 10 busiest airports was closed to all but emergency traffic from the time the quake hit Tuesday afternoon, until 6 a.m. PDT yesterday when controllers returned to the tower. 

Getting to and from the airport in coming weeks may be the problem, however. "People's ability to drive throughout the bay area is greatly restricted," said a spokesman for the American Automobile Association. 

Tom Schumacher, executive vice president and general manager of the California Trucking Association in Sacremento, said his organization urged trucking firms to halt all deliveries into the Bay area yesterday, except for emergency-medical supplies. "Some foodstuff shipments will probably resume Thursday," he said. "Right now most of the roads into the Bay area are closed, but the list of closings changes about every 20 minutes.
This {Wednesday} morning the San Mateo bridge was open and now we are informed that it is closed," Mr. Schumacher said. 

United Parcel Service, Greenwich, Conn., said its operations in the San Francisco area have been reduced to 40% of normal.
A UPS spokesman said that although none of the company's terminals, trucks or airplanes were damaged in the quake, road shutdowns and power failures have impeded its pickup and delivery of packages.
The spokesman noted four-hour to five-hour traffic delays on the San Mateo bridge, for example.
In addition, power failures prevented its package-sorting facilities from operating, causing delays. 

But freight railroads reported that damage to their facilities was relatively minor, with Santa Fe Pacific Corp. 's rail unit the least affected by the quake.
Santa Fe stopped freight trains Tuesday night while its officials inspected track but resumed service at 10:45 p.m. when they found no damage. 

Union Pacific Corp. 's rail unit said that except for damage to shipping containers in its Oakland yard, its track, bridges and structures were unharmed.
That railroad is operating trains but with delays caused by employees unable to get to work. 

Southern Pacific Transportation Co., the hardest hit of the three railroads in the Bay area, said service on its north-south coastline, which is used by an Amtrak train between Los Angeles and Seattle, was suspended temporarily because of kinked rails near the epicenter of the quake.
But service on the line is expected to resume by noon today. "We had no serious damage on the railroad," said a Southern Pacific spokesman. "We have no problem to our freight service at all expect for the fact businesses are shut down." 

Amtrak said it suspended train service into its Oakland station, which sustained "heavy structural damage" during the quake.
The passenger railroad said it terminated some runs in Sacramento, relying on buses to ferry passengers to the Bay area.
Amtrak said it planned to resume some train operations to Oakland late yesterday. 

Rail-transit operations suffered little damage, according to Albert Engelken, deputy executive director of the American Public Transit Association in Washington.
The Bay Area Rapid Transit "withstood the earthquake perfectly," said Mr. Engelken, adding that the rail system was running a full fleet of 45 trains during the day to provide an alternative for highway travelers. "The highway system is screwed up" by the earthquake, Mr. Engelken said. "The transit system is how people are going to be getting around." He added that San Francisco's trolley cars and trolley buses were also running at full service levels. 

Although air-traffic delays in San Francisco were significant yesterday, they didn't appear to spread to other airports.
The earthquake shattered windows at San Francisco International's air-traffic control tower and rained pieces of the ceiling down on controllers, three of whom suffered minor injuries.
Terminals at San Francisco International also were damaged, but the tower itself was intact.
Tuesday night, thousands were diverted to other airports and had to wait a day to resume travel. 

Runways at San Francisco weren't damaged, but traffic was being limited yesterday to 27 arrivals and 27 departures an hour -- down from 33 to 45 an hour normally -- mainly because the noise level in the control tower was overwhelming without the windows, an FAA spokeswoman said. 

While the airport was closed, flights were diverted to airports in Sacramento and Stockton, Calif.; Reno and Las Vegas, Nev.; and Los Angeles.
United Airlines, the largest carrier at San Francisco, was operating only 50% of its scheduled service in and out of the area because of damage to its terminal, which in turn was causing delays for travelers headed to the Bay area.
A United spokesman said 14 of its 21 gates were unusable, mainly because of water damage caused when a sprinkler system was triggered by the tremors. 

The United spokesman said none of its people were injured at the airport; in fact, as the airport was being evacuated Tuesday night, two babies were born. 

Yesterday, the United ticket counter was active, with people trying to get flights out, but the airline said demand for seats into the city also was active, with people trying to get there to help family and friends. 

The airports in San Jose and Oakland were both fully operational by noon yesterday, the Federal Aviation Administration said. 

In terms of diversions, Denver's Stapleton International may have experienced the most far-flung: A United flight from Japan was rerouted there. "I think that's the first nonstop commercial passenger flight from Japan to land here," an airport spokesman said. 

A Japan Air Lines spokesman said its flights into and out of San Francisco weren't affected, but getting information about its operations was difficult.
Its telecommunications headquarters in Burlingame, Calif., had been knocked out since the quake. "We're in the dark," he said. 

