.START 

Commodore International Ltd. said it will report a loss for the first quarter ended Sept. 30 because sales of personal computers for the home market remained weak in some major countries. 

That will mark the second consecutive quarterly loss for Commodore and will raise additional questions about whether it can sustain the turnaround it had seemed to be engineering.
Commodore, West Chester, Pa., had said in August that it was consolidating manufacturing to cut costs and expected to be profitable in the fiscal first quarter. 

Commodore said that its announcement is based on preliminary information and that the situation could look different by the time final results are announced early next month.
In fact, Commodore's fiscal fourth-quarter loss was $2 million narrower than Commodore had expected a few weeks after the quarter closed.
Still, even results approaching break-even would mark a sharp weakening compared with fiscal 1989 first-quarter earnings of $9.6 million, or 30 cents a share, on sales of $200.2 million. 

Reflecting concerns about Commodore's outlook, its stock has plunged more than 50% since May, closing yesterday unchanged at $8.875 a share in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The price can be expected to erode further, because the loss estimate came after the market closed. 

Commodore has seemed to be setting the stage recently for progress in the U.S., where its personal-computer sales have been so dismal for years that Commodore is close to dropping off research firms' market-share charts. 

Commodore has assembled an experienced management team, it has persuaded many more dealers to carry its products and it has unleashed a slick advertising campaign.
But those represent long-term strategies that probably won't succeed quickly, even if they turn out to be the right ones.
In the meantime, the strategies will increase expenses. 

Commodore had been counting on its consumer business to stay sufficiently healthy to support its efforts in other areas -- mainly in getting schools and businesses to use its Amiga, which has slick graphics yet has been slow to catch on because it isn't compatible with Apple Computer Inc. or International Business Machines Corp. hardware.
But sales to consumers have become difficult during the past several months, even in West Germany, which has been by far Commodore's strongest market. 

The Commodore 64 and 128, mainly used for children's educational software and games, had surprised market researchers by continuing to produce strong sales even though other low-profit personal computers now operate several times as fast and have much more memory.
Commodore has said it expects sales to rebound, but market researchers have said that sales of the low-end products may finally be trailing off. 

