.START 

Bond prices rambled yesterday as investors kept close watch on the stock market and worried about a wave of new supply. 

Early yesterday, bonds rose as investors rushed to buy Treasury securities on the prospect that stocks would plummet in the aftermath of the massive California earthquake.
For example, some securities analysts warned that stocks of certain insurance companies, which face massive damage claims, would get hit hard.
But when the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose instead, bonds drifted lower. 

With stocks not a major focus, "we're waiting for the next guiding light," said Brian J. Fabbri, chief economist at Midland Montagu Securities Inc. "If the stock market tremors are behind us, then the bond market will go back to looking at the next batch of economic numbers to determine" where interest rates are heading. 

The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond, which jumped 3/8 point, or about $3.75 for each $1,000 face amount, during the first hour of trading, ended little changed.
Interest rates barely budged from Tuesday's levels. 

Most junk bonds, which have been battered in recent weeks, continued a slow recuperation and ended unchanged to slightly higher.
But some so-called high-quality junk issues fell as some mutual funds sold their most liquid issues to raise cash.
RJR Holdings Capital Corp. 's 14.7% bonds due 2009 fell one point.
Other RJR issues fell between 1/2 point and 1 1/2 point. 

In the latest sign of how difficult it is to place certain junk bonds, Continental Airlines said it was forced to scale back the size of its latest offering. 

Continental, a unit of Texas Air Corp., slashed the size of its note offering from $150 million to $71 million.
The move had been widely expected.
In the multipart offering, the company sold a portion of secured notes but shelved all the unsecured notes. 

A Continental spokeswoman said the notes may be offered at a later date. "This was not a do-or-die deal," she said. "I think this is a market that required some level of security.
It did not make sense to offer unsecured paper in an unsettling market." 

Investors have been speculating for weeks about the market's ability to place the $7 billion to $10 billion of new junk bonds scheduled to be sold by year end. 

Supply troubles were also on the minds of Treasury investors yesterday, who worried about the flood of new government securities coming next week. 

"We're being bombarded by new Treasury and agency debt offerings," said William Sullivan Jr., director of money-market research at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. "The market is concerned about its ability to underwrite all this debt at current levels." 

In addition to the $15.6 billion of Treasury bills to be sold at next week's regular Monday auction, the government will sell $10 billion of new two-year Treasury notes.
And Resolution Funding Corp. said late yesterday that it will sell $4.5 billion of 30-year bonds Wednesday.
Refcorp is the financing unit of Resolution Trust Corp., a new government agency created to rescue the nation's troubled thrifts.
Its securities have been dubbed "bailout bonds" by traders.
In when-issued trading, the two-year Treasurys had a yield of about 7.88%. 

In the municipal market, all eyes were on California debt as investors tried to gauge the financial ramifications of Tuesday's earthquake. 

But traders said the quake had only a minor impact on the trading of California state and local municipal debt. 

"There are certain bonds traders refer to as `earthquake' bonds because the (issuers) are on top of the San Andreas fault," said Zane Mann, editor of the California Municipal Bond Advisor, a newsletter for investors.
Since those bonds already pay a slightly higher yield, an extra premium for the earthquake risk, they weren't materially affected. 

But some bond market analysts said that could quickly change if property casualty insurance companies scramble to sell portions of their municipal portfolios to raise cash to pay damage claims. 

"Insurance companies will foot a substantial amount of the bill to reconstruct San Francisco," said Charles Lieberman, chief economist at Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp.
He also expects the performance of municipals to lag Treasurys as California is forced to issue new debt over time to repair public facilities. 

A report issued late yesterday by Standard & Poor's Corp. concluded the quake won't cause "wide-scale credit deterioration" for issuers and debt issues in the 12-county area of Northern California affected by the quake. 

Treasury Securities 

Treasury bonds ended narrowly mixed in quiet trading. 

The benchmark 30-year bond ended at a price of 100 29/32 to yield 8.03%, compared with 100 28/32 to yield 8.04% Tuesday.
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at a price of 99 26/32 to yield 8%, compared with 99 25/32 to yield 8.01%. 

Short-term rates were little changed. 

Corporate Issues 

Investment-grade corporate bonds ended 1/4 point lower. 

The Continental junk bond offering, underwritten by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., was the only new issue priced yesterday.
In the four-part offering, the $71 million of secured equipment certificates was priced to yield 13.75% to 15.75%. 

Municipals 

Municipal bonds ended about 1/8 to 3/8 point lower, hurt by the circulation of two "bid-wanted" lists totaling $655 million. 

Chemical Securities Inc. is acting as agent for the seller. 

Meanwhile, some California issues were down a touch more than the broad market, but traders said there hadn't been much investor selling because of the quake. 

But New York City general obligation bonds came under selling pressure.
Traders said a steady stream of bonds was put up for sale yesterday, pushing yields for longer maturities up 0.05 percentage point.
Traders said investors were reacting to recent negative news on the city's finances and are nervous ahead of the Nov. 7 election. 

Washington, D.C., topped the competitive slate yesterday with a sale of $200 million of general obligation tax revenue anticipation notes. 

In late trading, New Jersey Turnpike Authority's 7.20% issue of 2018 was off 1/4 point at 98 bid.
The yield was 7.35%, up 0.01 percentage point. 

Mortgage-Backed Securities 

Mortgage securities ended little changed after light dealings. 

There was no appreciable market impact from the California earthquake. 

Dealers said there was some concern that insurance companies might be forced to sell mortgage securities to help pay earthquake-related claims, but no selling materialized. 

The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and Federal National Mortgage Association, two dominant issuers of mortgage securities, have a sizable amount of California home loans in their mortgagebacked pools. 

But their potential quake exposure is seen as small given that they require a financial cushion on all the loans they purchase.
And because Northern California home prices are so high, loans from the region often are too large to be included in Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae pools. 

Meanwhile, Government National Mortgage Association 9% securities for November delivery ended at 97 29/32, unchanged.
Freddie Mac 9% securities were at 97 4/32, down 1/32. 

In derivative markets, Fannie Mae issued two $400 million real estate mortgage investment conduits backed by its 9% securities. 

Foreign Bonds 

British government bonds, or gilts, ended moderately lower as equities there recovered from Tuesday's drop. 

The Treasury's 11 3/4% bond due 2003/2007 fell 11/32 to 111 31/32 to yield 10.08%, while the 12% notes due 1995 were down 7/32 to 103 22/32 to yield 11.04%. 

Traders said today may be an anxious day for the market.
Several key economic figures are due out and Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson is scheduled to give the annual "Mansion House" address to the financial community. 

The chancellor sometimes has used the occasion to announce major economic policy changes.
Economists don't expect any such changes in this year's address, given Mr. Lawson's apparent reluctance to adjust policy currently. 

Meanwhile, Japanese government bonds retreated in quiet trading, stymied by the dollar's resiliency.
Japan's bellwether 4.6% bond due 1998 ended on brokers' screens at 95.75 to yield 5.315%. 

In West Germany, investors stayed on the sidelines as the bond market searched for direction.
The government's 7% issue due October 1999 fell 0.05 point to 99.90 to yield 7.01%. 

