.START 

International Business Machines Corp. said its board approved the purchase of $1 billion of its common shares, a move that should help support its battered stock. 

Even as the stock market has generally done well this year, IBM's shares have slipped steadily from its 52-week high of $130.875.
Yesterday's closing price of $101.75, down 50 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, puts the stock at about 1 1/2 times book value, which is as low as it has sunk over the past decade. 

The announcement came after the market's close. 

The move by IBM wasn't exactly a surprise.
The company has spent some $5 billion over the past 3 1/2 years to buy back 42 million common shares, or roughly 7% of those outstanding. 

In addition, despite IBM's well-publicized recent problems, the computer giant still generates enormous amounts of cash.
As of the end of the second quarter, it had $4.47 billion of cash and marketable securities on hand. 

As a result, some securities analysts had predicted in recent days that IBM would authorize additional purchases. 

In Armonk, N.Y., a spokesman said that although IBM didn't view its spending as necessarily a way to support the stock, it thought the purchases were a good way to improve such financial measurements as per-share earnings and return on equity. 

"We view it as a good long-term investment," the spokesman said. 

In the short term, the move is likely to have little effect.
At yesterday's closing price, $1 billion would buy back about 10 million shares, or less than 2% of the roughly 580 million outstanding.
In addition, as of Sept. 30, the company still had authorization to buy $368 million of stock under a prior repurchase program. 

Over the long term, however, IBM's stock repurchases -- along with its hefty, $4.84-a-share annual dividend and generally loyal following among large institutional investors -- are providing a floor for the stock price. 

Although IBM last year produced its first strong results in four years and was expected to continue to roll this year, it began faltering as early as January.
First, it had trouble manufacturing a chip for its mainframes, IBM's bread-and-butter business.
Then it had a series of smaller glitches, including problems manufacturing certain personal computers and the delay in the announcement of some important workstations.
Finally, IBM had to delay the introduction of some high-end disk drives, which account for 10% of its $60 billion of annual revenue. 

None of the problems is necessarily fatal, and they aren't all necessarily even related.
There are also other factors at work that are outside IBM's control, such as currency exchange rates.
The strong dollar, which reduces the value of overseas earnings and revenue when they are translated into dollars, is expected to knock 80 to 85 cents off IBM's per-share earnings for the full year.
Without that problem, IBM might have matched last year's earnings of $5.81 billion, or $9.80 a share. 

Still, investors will take some convincing before they get back into IBM's stock in a big way.
Steve Milunovich, a securities analyst at First Boston, said that while investors were looking for an excuse to buy IBM shares a year ago, even the big institutional investors are looking for a reason to avoid the stock these days. 

