.START 

Bally Manufacturing Corp. and New York developer Donald Trump have agreed in principle to a $6.5 million settlement of shareholder litigation stemming from Bally's alleged greenmail payment to Mr. Trump. 

According to lawyers familiar with the settlement talks, the verbal agreement to end a lawsuit filed more than two years ago was reached last week and will soon be submitted to a federal judge in Camden, N.J. 

In February 1987, Bally thwarted a possible hostile takeover bid from Mr. Trump by agreeing to buy 2.6 million of Mr. Trump's 3.1 million Bally shares for $83.7 million -- more than $18 million above market price.
The term greenmail refers to a situation where a company pays a premium over market value to repurchase a stake held by a potential acquirer. 

Lawyers for shareholders, Bally and Mr. Trump all declined to talk publicly about the proposed settlement, citing a request by a federal court magistrate not to reveal details of the agreement until it is completed. 

But some attorneys who are familiar with the matter said the $6.5 million payment will be shared by Bally and Mr. Trump, with the casino and hotel concern probably paying the bulk of the money. 

The amount Bally and Mr. Trump will pay to settle the class-action suit pales in comparison to the $45 million Walt Disney Co. and Saul Steinberg's Reliance Group Holdings Inc. agreed to pay to settle a similar suit in July.
That settlement represented the first time shareholders were granted a major payment in a greenmail case.
Mr. Steinberg made a $59.7 million profit on the sale to Disney of his investment in the company in 1984. 

But lawyers said Mr. Steinberg probably faced much more potential liability because, when he sued Disney during his takeover battle, he filed on behalf of all shareholders.
When Disney offered to pay Mr. Steinberg a premium for his shares, the New York investor didn't demand the company also pay a premium to other shareholders.
When Mr. Trump sued Bally, he sued only on behalf of himself. 

Mr. Trump and Bally also appeared to have some leverage in the case because in the state of Delaware, where Bally is incorporated, courts have held that greenmail is often protected by the business-judgment rule.
That rule gives boards of directors wide latitude in deciding how to deal with dissident shareholders. 

SENATE HEARS final arguments in impeachment trial of federal judge. 

Yesterday, U.S. Judge Alcee Hastings faced his jury -- the full U.S. Senate -- and said, "I am not guilty of having committed any crime." 

Seventeen articles of impeachment against the Florida judge, one of the few blacks on the U.S. bench, were approved by the House in August 1988.
The central charge against Judge Hastings is that he conspired with a Washington lawyer to obtain a $150,000 bribe from defendants in a criminal case before the judge, in return for leniency.
He is also accused of lying under oath and of leaking information obtained from a wiretap he supervised. 

The Senate's public gallery was packed with Judge Hastings' supporters, who erupted into applause after he finished his argument.
Judge Hastings, who was acquitted of similar charges by a federal jury in 1983, claims he is being victimized and that the impeachment proceedings against him constitute double jeopardy. 

But Rep. John Bryant (D., Texas), the lead counsel for the House managers who conducted a lengthy inquiry into Judge Hastings' activities, said "a mountain of evidence points to his certain guilt." 

The Senate will deliberate behind closed doors today and is scheduled to vote on the impeachment tomorrow.
If the judge is impeached, as is thought likely, he will be removed from office immediately. 

However, Judge Hastings has said he will continue to fight and is contemplating an appeal of any impeachment to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

COMPANIES SEEKING to make insurers pay for pollution cleanup win court victory. 

In a case involving Avondale Industries Inc. and its insurer, Travelers Cos., the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New York ruled in favor of the company on two issues that lawyers say are central to dozens of pollution cases around the country. 

Travelers and other insurers have maintained that cleanup costs aren't damages and thus aren't covered under commercial policies.
They also have argued that government proceedings notifying a company of potential responsibility don't fit the legal definition of a lawsuit; thus, such governmental proceedings aren't covered by the policies, the insurers say. 

The appeals court disagreed on both counts.
Avondale was notified by Louisiana officials in 1986 that it was potentially responsible for a cleanup at an oil-recycling plant.
Avondale asked Travelers to defend it in the state proceeding, but the insurer didn't respond.
The appeals court upheld a district judge's ruling that the insurer had to defend the company in such proceedings. 

The appeals court also said, "We think an ordinary businessman reading this policy would have believed himself covered for the demands and potential damage claims" stemming from any cleanup. 

"This decision will have a very considerable impact," said Kenneth Abraham, professor of environmental law and insurance law at the University of Virginia, because many commercial insurance policies are issued by companies based in New York. 

William Greaney, an attorney for the Chemical Manufacturers Association, said that while other appeals courts have ruled differently on whether cleanup costs are damages, the influence of the appeals court in New York "will make insurers sit up and listen." He said the decision was the first in which a federal appeals court has ruled whether administrative government proceedings qualify as litigation. 

Barry R. Ostrager, an attorney for Travelers, said, "there are procedural bases on which this case will be appealed further." 

NEW YORK'S poor face nearly three million legal problems a year without legal help. 

That is the conclusion of a report released by the New York State Bar Association.
The report was based on a telephone survey of 1,250 low-income households across the state, a mail survey of major legal-services programs and on-site interviews with individuals in the field. 

"The report provides detailed documentation of the extent and nature of the problem and indicates how we may want to shape solutions," said Joseph Genova, chairman of the committee that oversaw the survey and a partner at the law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy. 

According to the study, slightly more than 34% of those surveyed reported having at least one housing problem every year for which they had no legal help.
Nearly 36% ranked housing problems as their most serious unmet legal need.
Other areas targeted by the survey's respondents included difficulty obtaining or maintaining public benefits (22%), consumer fraud (15.4%), and health-care issues (15%). 

During the 15-month survey, 43% of all legal-services programs said that at some period they were unable to accept new clients unless they had an emergency. 

Mr. Genova said the committee may meet to propose solutions to the problems identified in the study. 

PROSECUTOR TO JOIN Gibson Dunn: Assistant U.S. Attorney Randy Mastro, who headed the government's racketeering case against the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, will join Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher in its New York office.
Mr. Mastro has been with the New York U.S. attorney's office for nearly five years.
In 1987 he became deputy chief of the civil division.
Mr. Mastro will do civil litigation and white-collar defense work for Gibson Dunn, which is based in Los Angeles. 

FORMER APPLE COMPUTER Inc. general counsel John P. Karalis has joined the Phoenix, Ariz., law firm of Brown & Bain.
Mr. Karalis, 51, will specialize in corporate law and international law at the 110-lawyer firm.
Before joining Apple in 1986, Mr. Karalis served as general counsel at Sperry Corp. 

