.START 

Pinnacle West Capital Corp. said it suspended indefinitely its common stock dividend and reported a 91% plunge in third-quarter net income. 

The announcement, made after the close of trading, caught analysts by surprise.
The company closed at $12 a share, down 62.5 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

Pinnacle West slashed its quarterly dividend to 40 cents per share from 70 cents in December, saying at the time that it believed the new, lower dividend was "sustainable." 

A company spokesman said the decision to eliminate the dividend resulted from a quarterly appraisal and that circumstances had changed since the December announcement.
He declined to elaborate. 

Edward J. Tirello Jr., an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., speculated that the sudden dividend elimination presages an expensive agreement with thrift regulators over the company's insolvent MeraBank savings and loan unit. 

Analysts have estimated that Pinnacle West may have to inject between $300 million and $400 million into the MeraBank unit before turning the thrift over to federal regulators. 

The latest financial results at the troubled utility and thrift holding company, based in Phoenix, Ariz., reflect continuing problems at MeraBank and losses in real-estate, venture-capital and uranium-mining operations. 

Third-quarter net income slid to $5.1 million, or six cents a share, from $56 million, or 65 cents, a year earlier. 

Utility operations, the only company unit operating in the black in the latest period, had a 26% drop in profit, to $86.3 million, largely as a result of outages at the company's huge Palo Verde nuclear facility and the cost of purchased replacement power. 

In other operations, losses at MeraBank totaled $85.7 million in the latest quarter, compared with a $2.5 million profit a year earlier.
The latest quarter includes a $42.7 million addition to loan-loss reserves.
As recently as August, the company said it didn't foresee a need for substantial additions to reserves. 

Pinnacle's SunCor Development Co. real-estate unit's loss narrowed to $13.8 million from $78.4 million.
The latest period included a $9 million write-down on undeveloped land, while the year-earlier period included a $46 million reserve for real-estate losses. 

Losses at its Malapai Resources Co. uranium-mining unit narrowed to $3.4 million from $18 million a year ago, which included a $9 million write-down of utility inventories. 

Losses at El Dorado Investment Co., the venture-capital operation, widened to $6.8 million from $425,000 a year earlier.
The latest quarter included a $6.6 million write-down of investments. 

