.START 

This year is the 75th anniversary of the Federal Reserve System, and some members of Congress think it's time to take a fresh look at the nation's central bank.
After 75 years there may be a few things that are worth reexamining. 

The regional Federal Reserve Bank setup, for instance, may be out of date.
In earlier years it may have seemed reasonable to give Richmond, Va., a bank and allow Los Angeles only a branch of the San Francisco bank, but times have changed.
Maybe the whole regional system is an anachronism; the Fed, after all, is a national central bank. 

Some of the would-be reformers, however, want to restore an arrangement we once had -- or, at least, part of it.
In the beginning, the treasury secretary and the comptroller of the currency were both ex officio members of the Federal Reserve Board.
But in 1935, when Congress was trying to find someone or something to blame for the Great Depression, it decided to drop both the secretary and the comptroller from the board. 

Carter Glass, a former treasury secretary who was then back in Congress, probably influenced the decision.
He said that when he was on the board he felt that he had a great deal of power and, somehow, he didn't think that was a good thing. 

Times have changed.
Rep. Byron Dorgan (D., N.D.) has introduced a bill in Congress, co-sponsored by Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), that would put the treasury secretary back on the board.
There is doubt that the change would accomplish much but at least Congress, as in 1935, would be doing something.
So far no one has suggested putting the comptroller back on the board. 

Nicholas Brady, the incumbent treasury secretary, is of course aware of the proposal, and he doesn't like it much.
Mr. Dorgen has changed tactics, dropping the seat-for-the-secretary idea.
That may have pleased the secretary, but H. Erich Heinemann, chief economist of the investment firm of Ladenburg, Thalmann & Co., suggests that Mr. Brady may figure he already has all the power he needs. 

Like most treasury secretaries, Mr. Brady takes a keen interest in monetary matters, of course.
He was, in fact, taking an especially keen interest in board matters even before he went to the treasury.
After the October 1987 market crash, Mr. Brady as a private citizen headed a presidential commission that tried to decide what went wrong and what should be done about it.
One of the commission's recommendations was that a single agency, probably the Federal Reserve, should coordinate regulation of all financial markets. 

This recommendation might have encouraged a turf-hungry bureaucrat to try to expand his power, but so far Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan hasn't made a pitch for the job.
The Fed has plenty of responsibilities in times of market turmoil and in 1987 and again in 1989 it appears to have handled them well.
Mr. Brady has said he thought government agencies in the latest market drop were better prepared to coordinate their actions, but he has left no doubt that he still likes the ideas the commission advanced nearly two years ago. 

In recent weeks, moreover, Mr. Brady has joined other administration officials in trying to urge the Fed toward lower interest rates.
The urging admittedly has been gentle.
In an interview with the Washington Post in early October, the secretary said the Fed may be slightly more interested in curbing inflation than the administration is, while the administration may put slightly more emphasis on spurring economic growth. 

At least some economists, of course, would argue that inflation deserves a lot of emphasis.
Earlier this month the St. Louis Fed held a conference to assess the system's first 75 years.
Allan Meltzer, a Carnegie-Mellon University economist, noted that the Fed's record included the longest, most sustained, peacetime inflation in our history, dating from either 1966 or 1967 to 1989.
The inflation-growth argument is an old one, but Mr. Brady, on the board or off, is surely trying to influence Fed policy. 

Equally importantly, the treasury secretary has spearheaded the administration effort to bring the U.S. dollar down by shopping avidly for West German marks and Japanese yen.
The treasury can do something on its own, but to have any hope of success it needs help from the Fed.
The central bank has been helping, but apparently not especially eagerly. 

The Fed has been intervening in foreign currency markets, all right, but through August, at least, it appeared to be "sterilizing" the intervention.
In other words, it was offsetting purchases of marks and yen by buying dollars in the domestic money market. 

Now, sterilized intervention may have some effect.
When traders see the Fed is in the exchange market it may make them tread a little carefully, for fear of what the central bank may do.
But it's generally accepted that sterilized intervention has little or no lasting impact on currency values.
After August the Fed may have stopped sterilizing, but it's hard to see much impact on the dollar.
The dollar is still highly volatile.
The Fed has let interest rates slip slightly, but whether the main reason was dollar intervention, the gloomy reports on manufacturing employment, or the Friday 13 market drop, only Mr. Greenspan and his associates know. 

Earlier this year, Martin Feldstein, president of the National Bureau of Economic Research, argued forcefully that a government that wants steady, stable exchange rates might try some steady stable economic policies.
Trying to manage exchange rates to some desired level, he said, "would mean diverting monetary and fiscal policies from their customary roles and thereby risking excessive inflation and unemployment and inadequate capital formation." 

The more we think about it, the more we suspect Mr. Brady does indeed have enough power where he already is. 

