.START 

Marsh & McLennan Cos. said it agreed to acquire the rest of Gradmann & Holler, a leading West German insurance brokerage firm in which it has held a 15% stake for 15 years. 

The transaction, for cash and stock, would represent the biggest European takeover since 1980 for New York-based Marsh & McLennan, the world's largest insurance broker.
It's also the first major sign of the long-awaited consolidation in the European insurance industry as the European Community Commission moves toward a single market by 1992. 

Protective barriers will start coming down within the insurance industry next summer, when big industrial companies will be able to buy insurance from carriers in any other EC country for the first time.
That's why "we have been working hard to develop a single, more unified presence in Europe," said A.J.C. Smith, Marsh & McLennan's president, at a London news conference yesterday. 

Analysts speculated that Marsh & McLennan would spend between 250 million marks ($136.4 million) and 350 million marks for the rest of Gradmann & Holler, or roughly 25 to 30 times the private firm's estimated earnings. "This is paying a big price to maintain their virility as the world's leading insurance broker," said Philip Olsen, an analyst at Kitcat & Aitken, a U.K. brokerage firm. 

Earlier this year, New York Life Insurance Co. agreed to acquire Windsor Group Ltd., a first step toward establishing a presence in the European market ahead of 1992.
But most U.S. insurers haven't rushed to change the way they do business in Europe because they believe the European market will still be dominated by a handful of domestic companies. 

Under the proposed combination, Marsh & McLennan would gain a majority stake in Gradmann & Holler that would increase over time to the rest of the remaining 85%.
The three managing general partners would receive a "significant" number of Marsh & McLennan shares, said Walther L. Kiep, a partner who would also join Marsh & McLennan's board. 

Mr. Kiep said he sought the combination because "all our large clients in Germany are becoming European companies or multinational companies and they expect an insurance broker" to serve them as well in Paris as in Germany. 

Beatrice E. Garcia in Philadelphia contributed to this article. 

