.START 

This has been a week of stunning events behind what was once called the Iron Curtain and interesting shifts in official American policy toward Moscow.
It has also been a week when inside-the-beltway Washington has had a high old time gnawing over ex-President Reagan's multimillion-dollar junket in Japan.
The latter may seem oddly irrelevant, if not downright trivial, given the big picture and the way we have handled it in the nation's capital has done nothing to dispel that impression.
In fact, however, Mr. Reagan's casual debasement of the office he so recently held raises issues about which Americans can actually do something.
Our ability to influence the outcome of events in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union is far more marginal. 

Those events continue to move at a rate, and in a direction, which leave informed commentary -- let alone policy -- far in their wake.
Earlier this week, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze confessed that the U.S.S.R. ignored universal human values by invading Afghanistan and, to put it bluntly, "engaged in a violation of the ABM Treaty" by building its radar station at Krasnoyarsk.
Hungary is no longer a "Socialist Peoples" republic, the Communist Party no longer has automatic delegates in the U.S.S.R.'s Congress of Peoples Deputies and Egon Krenz was not backed unanimously by his fellow party functionaries when he took over as East Germany's new maximum leader.
All of that is just for starters, or so the hundreds of thousands of Eastern Europeans in the streets seem to hope and are certainly demanding. 

Of like, though lesser, note, Secretary of State James Baker put the administration four-square behind perestroika and glasnost, and therefore behind Mikhail Gorbachev, in a pair of carefully reasoned speeches over the past week or so.
And, last but not least, President George Bush now views the changes in Eastern Europe as "absolutely extraordinary" and believes that Mr. Krenz "can't turn the clock back" in East Germany because the change is too inexorable," as he told the New York Times's R.W. Apple Jr. (In other words, after some highly visible dithering and public airing of differences, the administration has come down on the side of those who believe that what we are witnessing from Berlin to Siberia is a good thing to be welcomed, rather than a new thing to be feared or viewed with suspicion.) 

All of this is what history will note, assuming that events don't make it seem a bad joke, when the record of this time is put down.
For journalists, however, who write what they fondly view as history's first draft, this has also been a week to give a lot of space and time to Ron and Nancy's sales appearance in Japan on behalf of a communications giant and its controversial founder.
It has been a well-paid transaction, this bartering away of the prestige of the republic's highest office.
The Japanese industrialist has coughed up at least $2 million, the Japanese government has put up just about as much, or so it is reported and at least one estimate puts the total tab at $7 million. 

All of which has enabled those of us in Washington who enjoy wallowing in such things to go into high public dudgeon, as Mr. Apple and I did the other night on ABC's "Nightline." Punching away, we raised what I still think were all the right issues and landed more than one hard blow, but at the end of the affair, there was just the tiniest nagging worry that we had been aiming at the wrong target.
As one of his defenders so aptly put it, President Reagan was simply doing what he had always done before his election (and some would say thereafter as well).
He was performing for pay, and why should anyone expect anything more? 

Primarily because there's more to the matter than Ronald Reagan's personal values, or lack of them.
Selling the presidency for a mess of pottage is not so much a devaluation from the norm of public life today as it is a reflection of the disintegration of public standards.
The theme song for the 1980s has been, "Anything Goes," and it has been whistled with gusto from Wall Street to some of the highest peaks of televangelism. 

There are those who say that this is nothing new, that America has always suffered from a bad case of schizophrenia when it comes to the dichotomy between what is professed and what is practiced.
There is evidence to support that view.
Eighty-three years ago, William James wrote to H.G. Wells: "The moral flabbiness born of the exclusive worship of the bitch goddess success . . . that, with the squalid cash interpretation put on the word success, is our national disease." 

But if it was the national disease in 1906, it is today the national commonplace.
If there is no law against it, do it. If the law leaves loopholes, use them.
If there is no moral prohibition that expressly forbids it, full speed ahead.
And if you are caught or if people complain, simply argue that "everyone does it" or "no one said I shouldn't " and brazen it out.
As a last recourse, when all else has failed and you are pinned, apologize for having disappointed those who trusted you but deny having actually done anything wrong. (See, for instance, Jim Bakker's remarks upon being sentenced to prison this Tuesday for defrauding the faithful.) Consider the troubling dissonance between Mr. Shevardnadze's speech of confession this week and the hang-tough defense of everyone concerned with the Iran-Contra affair.
The Soviet foreign minister publicly concedes that his government "violated norms of behavior" in Afghanistan and just plain lied about the radar station.
We have people in high place still lying through their teeth about Iran-Contra, and that apparently isn't going to change.
For that matter, those long ago identified as liars are still given respectful hearings in the press. 

That is the key to the current "national disease." No one seems willing to hold anyone in public life to a standard higher than the narrowest construction of the law.
The occasional media witch hunt about some politician's private peccadilloes notwithstanding, the general inclination is to offer a version of the old refrain, "Who am I to judge?" Thus, no standards, no judgment and no values. 

"You are mad because he's making so much money," say President Reagan's defenders.
No, we ought to be mad because he has demeaned the office we gave him, enlisting it in the service of private gain, just as we ought to be mad that public officials lie through their teeth, play disingenuous games about their activities or, to steal a phrase, make public service a private trough. 

"I'm not going to be stampeded into overreacting to any of this, President Bush told Mr. Apple in this week's interview.
He was referring to the "absolutely extraordinary" events in Eastern Europe, and it is a defensible position.
But there is no defense at all for the ethos of the 1980s.
We didn't stampede into it, we slithered and slipped down the long slope, and now we have as its quintessential symbol a former president huckstering for a foreign poohbah.
Or perhaps that is a fitting symbol for the United States of 1989: Everything for sale; nothing of real value. 

Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. 

