.START 

Richard Breeden hadn't noticed that his new desk had just four telephone lines and one phone.
It was, after all, only his second full day as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

But the lack of lines became painfully apparent.
As the stock market lurched into a 190-point free fall on Oct. 13, Mr. Breeden found himself scurrying around the sixth floor of the SEC -- from his desk, where the New York Stock Exchange was on an open line, to his assistant's office, where the Commodity Futures Trading Commission was connected, to a third room, where a computer monitored market moves.
With other anxious calls pouring in, he recalls, "I'd either have to disconnect the New York Stock Exchange or go out to the secretary's desk." 

It won't happen again.
Now there are more lines connected to the chairman's office, and the market-monitoring computer has been moved next to his desk.
It's all part of a new "command center." 

The changes in the office layout illustrate Mr. Breeden's stance as the nation's top securities regulator.
Like his predecessor, David Ruder, he was faced with a crisis in the stock markets soon after coming into office. 

But unlike Mr. Ruder, who during the 1987 crash damaged himself by saying rather offhandedly that the markets might be closed, Mr. Breeden is turning the market drop to his own advantage, using it to further his agenda for the SEC. 

In an interview and in congressional testimony, he repeatedly points to the recent 190-point plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average -- the second-largest ever -- as evidence of the need for Congress to give the SEC the ability to better monitor leveraged buy-out loan activity by brokerage firms and to track big trades in the market.
A veteran of another financial crisis, the savings-and-loan bailout, Mr. Breeden wants to have the SEC regulate securities issued by banks and S&Ls. 

More broadly, he wants to "modernize" regulation by eliminating barriers between commercial and investment banking and by helping U.S. financial firms compete in the global market.
He believes the tax code encourages the use of debt instead of stock and may fuel leveraged buy-outs, an area the SEC doesn't regulate directly but one where it wields influence both on Wall Street and in Congress. 

Also unlike Mr. Ruder, Mr. Breeden appears to be in a position to get somewhere with his agenda.
As a former White House aide who worked closely with Congress, he is savvy in the ways of Washington.
What's more, the coming months likely will offer him the opportunity to obtain his own majority on the five-member commission, enabling him to avoid the dissension that frustrated his predecessor. 

But Mr. Breeden, a 39-year-old securities lawyer, has skirted some of the heftier issues facing the financial markets.
For instance, he hasn't stated a clear position on high-risk, high-yield junk bonds, an area of growing concern as turmoil in the junk market spills over into stocks.
He may be waiting to see the results of several pending SEC studies of junk market liquidity and disclosure rules. 

He also has kept a close wrap on the names of people under consideration for the crucial post of enforcement director at the commission, a job vacant since the summer.
Mr. Breeden's selection will be scrutinized as an important signal about the strength of his commitment to continuing the SEC's high-profile pursuit of insider trading and market manipulation on Wall Street. 

Congress seems likely to let the new chairman have his way for a while.
Members of the Senate Banking Committee know Mr. Breeden from working on the thrift-bailout bill, and the relationship generally remains warm.
Indeed, during Mr. Breeden's confirmation hearing last month, senators asked him to introduce his children three separate times -- more often than they asked about his qualifications for the job. 

These days, Mr. Breeden is winning praise in Washington and on Wall Street for his behind-the-scenes role in monitoring the Friday-the-13th market plunge and the following Monday's harrowing morning session.
As a regulator charged with restoring investor confidence, Mr. Breeden avoided making market-jarring comments and worked to gather information critical to Wall Street and to other government agencies. 

Not everyone has jumped on the Breeden bandwagon, however.
Some in Washington contend that it's too soon to tell whether Mr. Breeden will help or hinder the SEC. "I don't think this was a real test," says one congressional aide. "It was a fairly stressful weekend, but my sense is if you hadn't had Richard Breeden there, it wouldn't have made much of a difference." 

For some at the SEC, an agency that covets its independence, Mr. Breeden may be too much of a Washington insider.
They note that he has adorned his office with five photos of George Bush, one of them featuring the First Dog, Millie.
They worry that Mr. Breeden also will roll over when told to do so by the White House.
But Mr. Breeden already has shown an eagerness to run the SEC his way.
During the Monday market rebound, a New York exchange spokesman told Cable News Network viewers that the industrial average had turned down 70 points.
Stunned, Mr. Breeden turned to his market-monitoring computer, which by then was next to his desk.
It showed the DJIA up 30 points. 

SEC staffers soon determined that a widely watched stock-market service, Quotron, had miscalculated the industrial average.
Mr. Breeden instructed SEC staffers to inform the network that it was airing the wrong number. "It was the plunge that didn't happen," he says. 

Mr. Breeden also is trying to use a far more catastrophic event -- the California earthquake -- to move another rule change past Congress.
That disaster closed the Pacific Stock Exchange's stock options-trading operation, forcing those options to be switched to other exchanges temporarily. 

Though obscure to most investors, the question of whether to list options on more than one exchange has aroused much interest in Congress, mainly because regional exchanges fear the change could bankrupt them. 

Congressmen raised the issue yesterday at a hearing.
Mr. Breeden, not missing a chance to press his agenda, cited the earthquake.
That event, he contended, simply shows the "vulnerability" of having listings on only one exchange. 

