.START 

In the bidding war for Public Service Co. of New Hampshire, United Illuminating Co. raised its proposed offer to one it valued at $2.29 billion from $2.19 billion, apparently topping all other bidders. 

The bids remain subject to evaluation by the federal bankruptcy court supervising PS of New Hampshire's reorganization.
They are also indirectly subject to approval by the state of New Hampshire, where residents fear soaring rates to pay for the cost of reorganization. 

Each of the four parties bidding for PS of New Hampshire proposes a complex financial package to satisfy creditors and shareholders and also proposes a formula to limit rate increases to satisfy the state. 

The new round of bidding would seem to complicate the decision making for Judge James Yacos, the bankruptcy judge overseeing the case, because the company's stockholders, unsecured creditors and regulators each are currently backing different plans.
In addition, some of the proposals are so close, that non-financial issues such as timing may play a more important role. 

The unsecured creditors agreed in principle to support New Haven, Conn.-based United Illuminating's new bid.
They previously had backed an internal reorganization plan proposed by PS of New Hampshire. 

All of the bidders contemplate full payment including interest to secured creditors.
United Illuminating's plan, however, offers more for unsecured creditors. 

Geoffrey Kalmus, counsel to the official creditors committee, said that under the United Illuminating plan, unsecured creditors would be paid in full credits and interest of about $855 million, accrued before PS of New Hampshire's Jan. 1988 filing for bankruptcy court protection. In addition, they would receive some $200 million in payments for interest since then.
Mr. Kalmus said that by next July they would have accrued unpaid interest equal to $350 million.
Other plans generally wouldn't pay unsecured creditors' interest accrued since the filing. 

Under United Illuminating's plan, a new holding company would be formed to own the two companies.
It would be 72%-owned by United Illuminating holders and 28%-owned by current holders of PS of New Hampshire preferred and common stock.
PS of New Hampshire preferred holders also would get certain debentures and preferred stock.
United Illuminating said the preferred holders total package would equal about 60% of their claims.
Common shareholders would end up owning about 6.4% of the combined company. 

As previously reported, Northeast Utilities, Hartford, Conn., Monday filed a bid it valued at $2.25 billion.
That offer was endorsed by the shareholders committee. 

The other bidders, New England Electric System, Westboro, Mass., and PS of New Hampshire, didn't change the value of their bids, although PS of New Hampshire changed its rate proposal.
New England Electric values its offer at $2 billion and PS of New Hampshire values its reorganization plan at $2.2 billion. 

The bankruptcy judge has ruled that federal bankruptcy laws could be used to circumvent state regulation.
However, creditors and bidders alike concede that the state plays a major role because it could significantly delay final settlement of a plan it didn't like. 

The state has endorsed the New England Electric plan, which promises to limit rate increases to 4.8% annually for seven years.
Northeast Utilities' plan proposes 5.5% annual increases. 

PS of New Hampshire amended its plan to call for two years of 5.5% rate increases followed by five years of 4.5% increases.
Fuel cost adjustments could change the effective rate increases, however.
Previously it had proposed seven years of 5.5% increases. 

United Illuminating also amended its rate plan.
The new offer assumes just five years of 5.5% rate increases, to be followed by state-approved increases under the usual hearing procedure.
Previously United Illuminating had also called for seven years of 5.5% increases. 

The bids and rate proposals generally assume the Seabrook nuclear power plant, which is completed, will go into operation.
Most of the plans have reduced bids in case the plant fails to get a license from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 

In New York Stock Exchange trading, PS of New Hampshire's 17 1/2 debenture due 2004 closed yesterday at $82.50, up $2.
The utility's stock closed at $4 a share, up 37.5 cents, in composite trading on the Big Board. 

In a separate development, PS of New Hampshire gave 60 managers severance agreements that would pay one to three years' salary if their jobs were changed or they were dismissed in the wake of a takeover.
It said the maximum cost of the plan would be $9.7 million. 

