.START 

Investors poured $2.8 billion more into money-market mutual funds in the latest week despite further declines in yields. 

Assets of the 400 taxable funds tracked by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report jumped to $351.2 billion in the week ended Tuesday, the Holliston, Mass.-based newsletter said.
Assets soared $4.5 billion in the previous week. 

Meanwhile, the average yield on taxable funds dropped nearly a tenth of a percentage point, the largest drop since midsummer.
The average seven-day compound yield, which assumes that dividends are reinvested and that current rates continue for a year, fell to 8.47%, its lowest since late last year, from 8.55% the week before, according to Donoghue's. 

"Lower yields are just reflecting lower short-term interest rates," said Brenda Malizia Negus, editor of Money Fund Report.
Money funds invest in such things as short-term Treasury securities, commercial paper and certificates of deposit, all of which have been posting lower interest rates since last spring. 

Individual investors can still get better yields on money funds than on many other short-term instruments.
The yield on six-month Treasury bills sold at Monday's auction, for example, was just 7.77%.
The average yield on six-month CDs of $50,000 or less at major banks was 7.96% in the week ended Tuesday, according to Banxquote Money Markets, a New York information service. 

One way that money fund managers boost yields in a declining rate environment is by extending the maturities of their investments, so they can earn the current higher rates for a longer period.
The average maturity of the taxable funds that Donoghue's follows increased by two days in the latest week to 40 days, its longest since August. 

"They're anticipating further declines in rates and they're going to get them, slowly," said Walter Frank, chief economist for the Donoghue Organization, publisher of Money Fund Report. 

Average maturity was as short as 29 days at the start of this year, when short-term interest rates were moving steadily upward.
The average seven-day compound yield of the funds reached 9.62% in late April. 

The highest-yielding funds are still above 9%.
The top-performing fund in the latest week was Dreyfus Worldwide Dollar, with a seven-day compound yield of 9.45%.
The fund invests heavily in dollar-denominated money-market securities overseas.
It is currently waiving management fees, which contributes to the higher yield. 

The average seven-day simple yield of the 400 funds fell to 8.14% from 8.21%, Donoghue's reported.
The average 30-day simple yield slid to 8.22% from 8.26%, and the average 30-day compound yield fell to 8.56% from 8.60%. 

