.START 

Sears, Roebuck & Co. signed a contract with Bob Vila, the former host of the popular public television program "This Old House," to star in a half-hour home improvement show sponsored by the giant retailer. 

The do-it-yourself show, slated to start airing by June 1990, marks Sears's entry into the burgeoning market of home repair television programs and could bolster sales of its home improvement products.
In recent months, sales of home improvement items have sagged, along with sales of other big ticket durable goods. 

The show also signals Mr. Vila's return as a television celebrity.
Earlier this year, public television station WGBH in Boston fired Mr. Vila after a sponsor protested some of his numerous commercial endorsements. 

With Mr. Vila as host, "This Old House" became one of the Public Broadcasting Service's top 10 programs, airing weekly on about 300 of the network's stations and seen by an average of 12 million viewers. 

But Home Depot Inc., an Atlanta-based home center chain, objected when Mr. Vila started doing commercial endorsements for Rickel Home Centers, a New Jersey building supply company that competes with Home Depot in some markets. 

"I'm ecstatic about the change," said Mr. Vila, whose new syndicated program is called "Home Again with Bob Vila." In an interview, Mr. Vila criticized his old show, which is continuing with a new host. 

"Public TV is in fantasy land," he said. "Last season, we did a story that involved spending $700,000 in converting a two-family house into a bed and breakfast." In the new show, he said, "we're going to spend $60,000 building a start-up house" for a young couple. 

While Sears wouldn't comment on the brouhaha over Mr. Vila's commercial endorsements, it appears to be building a fence around Mr. Vila's affections.
His contract makes him "exclusive" spokesman for Sears's home improvement marketing campaigns.
Ogilvy & Mather in Chicago, a unit of WPP Group PLC, will handle the advertising account and syndication. 

The only other endorsement permitted by the contract involves a series of Time-Life home improvement and repair books.
His other agreements to promote products have expired.
Little matter for Mr. Vila, who complains that "public TV never paid me more than $40,000 a year." He said his compensation under the Sears contract is "a multimillion dollar deal." 

