.START 

In a corner of the cavernous, new Nippon Convention Center sits Mazda Motor Corp. 's advanced-technology display.
The highlight: a "fragrance control system." 

With the touch of a button, drivers can choose from lavender, jasmine, mint or perfume scents, all blown in through the car's air-conditioning system.
The soft, wafting aromas will "improve ride comfort," the display attests, and a proud employee says Mazda hopes to move the system out of the lab and into its cars in a year or two. 

Welcome to the 28th Tokyo Motor Show.
Here you can find Mitsubishi Motors Corp. displaying a "live fish transporter," a truck akin to an aquarium on wheels, and Nissan Motor Co. with its "keyless" Boga, whose doors unlock upon recognizing the owner's fingerprints.
Suzuki Motor Co. 's Escudome sport vehicle features a pop-out rear tent and invites drivers to go "back to the nature." 

But this biennial event, the world's largest display of cars and trucks, has its serious side, including the first major exhibitions of future engines and vehicle-suspension systems.
It's also the prime showcase for a country whose world dominance in the industry is increasingly acknowledged, and therein lies the draw. 

Even the biggest auto shows in the U.S. are largely regional affairs, but the Tokyo show is international.
Virtually every automotive analyst in New York showed up. Detroit-to-Tokyo flights were booked solid this week as Motor City executives, including Ford Motor Co. Chairman Donald E. Petersen and Chrysler Corp. Vice Chairman Gerald Greenwald, flocked to see the future.
Even the Soviet Union came, for the first time in 24 years, to show off its Lada Niva sedan and its futuristic dark-blue "Kompakt" model. 

Here's a firsthand look at what the Japanese hosts sported, and what the foreign visitors saw. 

New Technology 

The hottest displays were items that insulate passengers from bumps, potholes and other rigors of the road.
These "active suspension systems" electronically sense road conditions and adjust a car's ride.
Existing suspension systems try to absorb bounces, but active suspension provides power to counter the jolts. 

Nissan, in a 34-page tract, modestly compares its "hydraulic active suspension" to a cheetah, and equates the various parts to the animal's heart, brain, nerves and blood vessels.
Toyota Motor Corp. grandly touted its system in a car that splits in half to reveal the suspension's inner workings. 

Nissan says it will introduce its first system next month on the Infiniti Q45 luxury sedan, and Toyota's Celica coupe will go on sale with the suspension device next spring.
But drivers in the U.S. must wait: The Japanese, for now, are keeping active suspension for domestic use only.
And Detroit's Big Three auto makers say their systems are still under development. 

In the engine department, several companies displayed experimental models that within a decade could provide power equal to today's engines and yet take up only half the space, allowing for shorter hoods.
In the so-called two-stroke engines, which are expected to get sharply higher gas mileage, each piston goes up and down only once to provide power.
By contrast, the pistons in conventional four-stroke engines must move up and down twice in each power cycle. 

The two-stroke engine displays by Toyota and Fuji Heavy Industries, the maker of Subaru cars, drew plenty of interest from U.S. auto executives, who are rushing to develop two-stroke engines. 

Honda Motor Co. shows a more conventional five-cylinder engine in the new Accord Inspire model, which made its debut just this month -- in Japan only.
Honda says the five-cylinder engine provides a compromise between the fuel-economy of a four-cylinder, and the power of a V-6.
It is rumored to be bound for a new model in the luxury Acura line in the U.S., but Honda officials wouldn't comment. 

Odd Cars, Funny Names 

There's plenty of whimsy here, but it isn't always clear whether it's intentional.
The show's symbol is a woman riding on a snail, not your usual metaphor for speed and agility.
But the sponsors have an explanation: "Through the character associated with a snail," they say, "important values such as harmony with nature and aspirations for the future are sought." 

Japanese auto makers are known for coming up with funny names, but this year the practice seems to have reached a new high -- or low.
Honda has a tiny motorcycle called the Monkey, and a slightly larger cousin, the Gorilla.
Mitsubishi has a futuristic delivery truck called the Guppy.
Mazda has the Bongo truck and, under its Autozam nameplate, a "microvan" called the Scrum.
Its buglike Carol minicar is "designed with softness, gentleness and warmheartedness." 

But the court jester appears to be Japan's smallest car maker, Daihatsu Motor Co.
One of its futuristic concepts is the bubblelike Sneaker, which seats just one person in front and could hold a small child and bag of groceries in the rear.
Daihatsu also has the Fellow 90, the Leeza Spider and the Hijet Dumbo. 

The jokes aren't just on the Japanese, though.
Regie Nationale des Usines Renault, the French auto maker, has a concept car called the Megane.
The name is supposed to connote feminine grandeur, but in Japanese it means "eyeglasses." 

Foreign Presence 

Foreign auto makers are taking the Tokyo Motor Show more seriously than ever.
AB Volvo invites passers-by to play "the role of the test dummy" by hopping in a car that simulates a crash to show just how its seat-belt tightener works.
Hyundai Motor Co. of South Korea has its first-ever exhibit in Tokyo. 

General Motors Corp. is sponsoring its first independent display in 10 years, and it includes a boxy Buick station wagon with wood-grain side panels.
Ford and Chrysler also have exhibits, although theirs are tucked in a separate room with the less-popular automotive parts section. 

"We've got to get out of the Detroit mentality and be part of the world mentality," declares Charles M. Jordan, GM's vice president for design, in explaining his pilgrimage to the Tokyo Show. 

Even so, traditional American cockiness isn't terribly endangered.
Ford officials, for example, crowed about their first-ever Tokyo Grand Prix racing victory.
True, Ford was declared the winner Sunday, but only after the Honda driver who crossed the finish line first was disqualified because it hit another car and skid momentarily out of bounds. 

Mr. Jordan of GM, meanwhile, still criticizes Japanese styling. "It's hard for the Japanese," he says, "to get a feeling in a car, to get a passion in a car, to get emotion in a car." 

