.START 

The Soviet State Bank announced a 90% devaluation of the ruble against the dollar for private transactions, in an apparent attempt to curb the nation's rapidly growing black market for hard currency. 

The measure, which will take effect next Wednesday, will create a two-tier exchange rate.
Commercial transactions will continue to be based on the official rate of about 0.63 rubles to the dollar.
But for Soviet citizens who travel abroad for business or tourism, the rate will jump to 6.26 rubles to the dollar. 

Tass news agency said the devaluation also will apply to foreigners' transactions.
But it didn't elaborate, and it remains unclear how far Western tourists and foreigners living in Moscow will be allowed to benefit from the sweeping rate cut. 

The current ruble rate has long been out of line with the black market.
As Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has opened up the country to foreign trade, the discrepancy has become ever greater.
Western tourists in the Soviet Union who could exchange a dollar -- albeit illegally -- for about four rubles a year ago are now being offered 15 rubles or more. 

Even at such rates, black marketeers have been able to make big profits because of the dire shortage of consumer goods here.
They use dollars to buy Western items such as video recorders and personal computers and then sell them at a huge mark-up.
The going rate for a small personal computer that costs about $2,000 in the West is anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000 rubles.
Even a pack of 20 Western cigarettes can fetch 20 rubles or more.
With more than 300 billion rubles in savings accounts and little to spend them on, Soviet consumers grumble at the exorbitant black-market prices for such goods -- but they buy them anyway. 

Moscow has already tacitly admitted that the ruble isn't worth much, announcing in August that it will pay Soviet farmers in hard currency for grain and other produce that they grow in excess of state-plan quotas. 

"The absurdity of the official rate should seem obvious to everyone," the afternoon newspaper Izvestia wrote in a brief commentary on the devaluation. 

The State Bank's move is part of a drive to iron out exchange-rate discrepancies as Moscow moves toward making the ruble convertible -- a goal that Soviet bankers and economists say is still far away.
Rumors of an impending devaluation have been circulating in Moscow for weeks, but the size of the cut took many Western bankers by surprise. "It's much bigger than we expected," said one German banker, who asked not to be named. 

The next step, which could have a larger effect on businesses, will come early next month, when the Bank for Foreign Economic Affairs is to hold its first auction of foreign currency.
Soviet companies needing Western currencies to buy equipment and supplies abroad will be able to submit bids. 

Plans for the auction, which was supposed to take place last spring and become a regular event, have been thwarted by a lack of hard currency.
Soviet firms that hold some are unwilling to part with it, and joint ventures aren't yet allowed to participate.
The Kremlin also has been unwilling to provide hard currency for the auction, using a lot of it instead to finance emergency imports of consumer goods. 

If foreign tourists and businesses could sell their currencies freely at the new, better exchange rate, that would enable the State Bank to increase its dollar reserves and would mop up some of the excess rubles in the economy at the same time.
But the amounts they exchange may be limited; most Soviet hotels, for example, demand payment in hard currency from Western visitors. 

Unless other rules are changed, the devaluation could cause difficulties for the people it is primarily meant to help: Soviets who travel abroad.
Over the past three years, thousands of people here have made use of looser travel restrictions to get their first taste of life abroad. 

But under current rules, they are allowed to change just 200 rubles into dollars and other currencies for each trip.
At the new rate, that would give them about $30 to travel on.
It isn't yet clear whether the 200-ruble limit will be lifted.
If it isn't, the black market for dollars probably will continue to thrive. 

