.START 

Brooks Armored Car Service Inc. never wanted to get into money laundering. 

But July 5, a thunderstorm in Wilmington, Del., caused Shellpot Creek to rise 15 feet, pouring 1.3 million gallons of water into basement vaults.
The water destroyed about $75 million in currency and caked $4 million of coins with mud, rendering them dangerous to counting machines. 

The $75 million in paper money, although moldy, mildewy and smelly, was exchanged through the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia without incident.
But Brooks was unable to reach a coin-cleaning agreement with the government. 

"We kind of got caught between bureaucracies," says President William F. Brooks Jr.
The U.S. Mint wouldn't take the coin because it wasn't mutilated, and the Federal Reserve Bank accepts only clean coins, he says. 

The Philadelphia Fed says it is merely an "agent" for coins, responsible only for storage and distribution. "We issue paper money; we destroy paper money," says Jane Hinkle, a Philadelphia Fed spokeswoman. "The coin is their problem." 

A Mint official says the agency offered to clean the coins for its "bare-bones" cost of $17,000 plus certain other expenses.
But Brooks declined, figuring that transporting the mucked up money to Washington would cost the company thousands more. 

So Brooks gave the dirty work to Coin Wrap Inc., which came up with an unusual solution. 

For eight hours a day for the past two weeks, in aggregates of as much as 27,000 pounds (equaling $20,000 in pennies), Coin Wrap has been pouring money into a cement-mixing truck.
A giant heater, working like a blowtorch, causes the mud to crust and burns off any wrappers.
After clanging around for an hour or so, the shiny, hot money pours out of the cement chute, where a giant vacuum sucks away the dried mud and burnt wrappers.
After cooling, the coins are then rewrapped. 

Brooks expects to pay Coin Wrap a total of about $20,000 -- a cost that insurance won't cover.
And while the job is half done, Brooks is still bitter.
In fact, there's only one person involved who's happy, and that's Floyd String, president of Coin Wrap and conceiver of the cement-truck solution.
Not only did his company find $20,000 worth of work, but when the approach was suggested, Mr. String says, Brooks officials "didn't laugh at me or anything." 

