.START 

Troubled SCI Television Inc. proposed to restructure much of its $1.3 billion in debt to buy time to sell assets and pay its obligations. 

The leveraged buy-out firm of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., which owns 46% of the common equity of SCI TV, indicated in the debt plan that it would reduce its equity stake to 15%, giving the rest of its stake to bondholders in the restructuring. 

KKR also signaled to the company's creditors that Henry Kravis and other KKR directors of SCI TV would resign from the board once the restructuring is completed and forgo their voting rights. 

Holders of SCI TV's $507 million of high-yield junk bonds are being asked to forgive a lot of debt in exchange for taking a 39% equity stake in SCI TV.
They immediately termed the proposal inadequate and said the restructuring would not solve the company's problems. 

"I think the current plan is sufficiently flawed in a sufficient number of bondholders' eyes that substantial revisions will be required to get it done," says analyst Craig Davis of R.D. Smith & Co. here. 

Investors interpreted the KKR move as a desire by the firm to wash its hands of SCI TV.
But a spokesman for KKR says that with only a 15% equity stake, it wouldn't be appropriate for KKR to keep board representation. 

KKR already has made about $1 billion of gains from earlier transactions with SCI TV, thus it isn't significantly affected by the company's troubles. 

SCI TV, which is controlled by Nashville, Tenn., entrepreneur George Gillett, owns six TV stations, including several CBS Inc. affiliates.
It is having trouble meeting its debt payments because of heavy borrowing in 1987 for a leveraged buy-out. 

Through investment banker Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., SCI TV is offering to exchange three classes of junk bonds for packages of new bonds and equity that investors value at ranges from 20 cents to 70 cents on the dollar.
KKR would give up a 31% equity stake to bondholders, while Mr. Gillett would surrender an 8% stake.
While one big SCI TV investor thinks that's pretty generous, many junkholders had been hoping that KKR and Mr. Gillett would invest new money in SCI TV.
Those investors think SCI TV needs new equity to survive. 

SCI TV's debt restructuring plan would defer payment of $153 million of bank debt.
It also would defer interest and principal on junk bonds that have fallen due; the grace period for paying the bill expires Nov. 16. 

At the same time, investors estimate the restructuring would cut the company's annual cash interest bill from about $90 million to $85 million.
Yet to pay that interest bill, analysts say SCI TV will only produce about $80 million to $90 million of cash flow a year. 

