.START 

Friday, Oct. 27, 9 p.m.-midnight EDT, on PBS (PBS air dates and times vary, so check local listings): "Show Boat." New Jersey's Paper Mill Playhouse produced this faithful revival of America's most influential musical, written by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein and first produced on Broadway in 1927.
Worth watching, although the music has lasted better than the plot or the humor. 

Saturday, Oct. 28, 8-10 p.m. EDT, on HBO (repeated Oct. 31, Nov. 5, 8, 14, 16 and 20): "Perfect Witness." Aidan Quinn, Brian Dennehy and Stockard Channing are excellent in this gripping tale of a reluctant witness in an organized crime prosecution.
It's set in New York, but it resonates with the terrible dynamics of the Latin American drug wars. 

Sunday, Oct. 29, 8-11 p.m. EST, on ABC: "The Final Days." No doubt there is something to irk everyone in this AT&T-sponsored dramatization of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein's book about Watergate.
Personally, I'm irked by its combination of ponderousness and timidity, which adds up to an utter lack of drama. 

Sunday, Oct. 29, 10-11 p.m. EST, on Showtime (repeated Nov. 2, 6, 11 and 15): "The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde." Fans of Anthony Andrews ("Brideshead Revisited") will relish watching him play the title role(s) in the 19th-century Robert Louis Stevenson pre-Freudian drama of schizoid horror. 

Monday, Oct. 30, 10-11 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Journey Into Sleep." I promise you will stay awake through this intriguing documentary about the science of sleep. 

Wednesday, Nov. 1, 9-10:30 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Thomas Hart Benton." Critical opinion is divided about the success of Benton's populist defiance of modernist art.
But no one could disagree that Ken Burns has made a fascinating film about this famous American painter. 

Thursday, Nov. 2, 9-10 p.m. EST, on A&E (repeated at 1 a.m. and on Nov. 5): "Third and Oak: The Pool Hall." A one-acter by the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Marsha Norman is the first presentation in a new series called "American Playwrights Theater," sponsored by General Motors.
James Earl Jones and Mario Van Peebles carry out a bitter intergenerational dialogue between two black men. 

Thursdays, Nov. 2-23, 10-11 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Taiwan: The Other China." Judy Woodruff hosts this handsome four-part series about the history, economy, culture and politics of the island home of Chinese democracy and capitalism. 

Friday, Nov. 3, 9-11 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Our Town." Along with "Show Boat," "Great Performances" kicks off its new season with this Lincoln Center production of Thornton Wilder's best known play, in which the role of the small-town Stage Manager is given a hip twist by performance artist Spalding Gray. 

Saturday, Nov. 4, 1:30-6 p.m. EST, on NBC: Breeder's Cup Day.
Polished hooves, fancy turf, fat purses -- the horse race of the year. 

Sunday, Nov. 5, 10:30 a.m.-1:30 p.m. EST, on ABC: New York City Marathon.
Shiny Nikes, cracked cement, media glory -- the foot race of the year. 

Sunday, Nov. 5, 8-9 p.m. EST, on TNT: "Gary Cooper: American Life, American Legend." I've seen a great many moviestar film portraits, and this one is outstanding. 

Sundays, Nov. 5-12, 9-10:30 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Glory Enough for All." Can "Masterpiece Theatre" make a compelling human story out of the discovery of insulin?
This earthy, amusing film answers with a resounding "yes." 

Sunday and Monday, Nov. 5 and 6, 9-11 p.m. EST, on NBC: "Cross of Fire." The Ku Klux Klan was revived in the 1920s as a national organization aimed at Catholics and Jews as well as blacks.
One reason for its downfall was the murder trial of D.C. Stephenson, an Indiana leader whose reckless career is depicted in this film starring Mel Harris ("thirtysomething") and John Heard. 

Tuesday, Nov. 7, 8-9 p.m. EST, on PBS: "Hurricane!" Has the San Francisco earthquake caused you to forget Hugo?
You'll remember when you see the stunning footage taken from inside a hurricane's eye, in this edition of "NOVA." 

