.START 

Two old friends, George Bush and Deng Xiaoping, are trying to limit further damage to U.S.-China ties.
But as Congress prepares a fresh package of sanctions against Beijing, the already-tense relationship could get worse. 

The problem for Congress will be to weigh what China is saying to its people against the more conciliatory message it is delivering to the Bush administration. 

In a move apparently aimed at heading off new punitive legislation, Mr. Deng sent an indirect signal to Washington via T.D. Lee, a Columbia University physicist who met Mr. Deng and other Chinese leaders in Beijing last month.
When he met with Mr. Bush on his return, Mr. Lee says, he told the president that the Chinese "made statements to me that I regard as a first step toward reconciliation." 

The communication Mr. Lee brought represents the softer line the U.S. has been hoping to hear from Chinese officials since the June 4 massacre of pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing. 

The Chinese leader, Mr. Lee informed Mr. Bush, expressed some regret for what had happened in Beijing and conceded that China's officials bore some responsibility.
Mr. Lee says Mr. Deng told him: "We should not mind those who participated in demonstrations, signed anti-government materials and went on hunger strikes." Mr. Deng added, says Mr. Lee, that "we really made mistakes.
We must not shirk our responsibility and we cannot just blame the demonstrators." 

Mr. Lee also reported to the president that, in a separate meeting, Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin said the Chinese leadership "looked kindly on the students who took part in the demonstrations." Mr. Jiang also pledged that the Chinese Red Cross would publish "very soon" a list of those killed.
And he told the physicist that China's leaders were "very much concerned" about the deaths and had arranged aid for the victims' families. 

"I transmitted my conversations to the White House," Prof.
Lee says.
But, he adds, "I was not acting as a messenger." He says that the Chinese never asked him to convey their statements to President Bush, but that the White House spontaneously invited him to do so.
Mr. Lee concedes the statements made to him are far different from others being issued in China, but attributes that to the fact that the situation in China is "very complex." 

According to U.S. sources in Beijing, the administration hopes Mr. Deng's fairly conciliatory comments will prod Congress to be cautious about further sanctions against Beijing. "The president doesn't want to have legislative sanctions," says a U.S. official. "But he may not have a choice." 

Given China's far-from-conciliatory statements to its own people, Mr. Bush may be unable to prevent new sanctions.
Beijing officials have said they will step up the campaign of arrests and intimidation against those who participated in the demonstrations.
Sentences have been stiff.
A university student got eight years for participating in the rallies, sources in Beijing said, while an 18-year-old worker got 10 years. 

Nor has Beijing hinted to its citizens that it will publish the identities of those killed.
So far, the victims are officially considered evil-doers, and their families receive no compensation.
A man gunned down by a stray bullet while cycling to work carries, after his death, the official stigma of "counterrevolutionary," his wife says. 

What's more, much of China's official rhetoric is hostile to the U.S. China frequently lambastes the U.S. Embassy for harboring astrophysicist Fang Lizhi, a political dissident who took refuge there after the massacre. "In the U.S., there are still people who want to crush China and interfere in our internal affairs," Zhu Qizhen, China's new ambassador to the U.S., said as he left for Washington last week. 

The House and Senate are to begin soon hashing out an agreement for sanctions legislation.
It will probably be attached to a State Department authorization bill, which Mr. Bush isn't expected to veto.
A congressional staffer involved in drafting the sanctions says they are likely to mirror those Mr. Bush enacted shortly after the massacre.
But as legislative action, they would carry greater weight and would be more difficult to rescind. 

Measures already in effect that are expected to be made law include a ban on military sales and exchanges, a suspension of most high-level government contacts and a halt to U.S. trade enhancement programs, such as the Overseas Private Investment Corp. and the Trade Development Program. 

Codifying those sanctions could prompt Chinese retaliation. "If the two sides aren't careful, U.S.-China ties could spin downward, out of control," says a U.S. official in Beijing. "Bush and Deng are hoping {that} cooler heads prevail." 

