.START 

Motorola is fighting back against junk mail.
So much of the stuff poured into its Austin, Texas, offices that its mail rooms there simply stopped delivering it.
Now, thousands of mailers, catalogs and sales pitches go straight into the trash. 

"We just don't have the staff to {deliver} it, nor do we have the space or the time," says a spokesman for the Schaumburg, Ill., electronics company, which has 5,000 employees in the Austin area. "It's the overload problem and the weight problem we have." 

Motorola is in good company.
Businesses across the country are getting fed up with junk mail, and some are saying they just aren't going to take it anymore -- literally.
While no one has tracked how many company mail rooms throw out junk mail, direct-mail advertising firms say the number is growing. 

General Motors earlier this year said it wouldn't deliver bulk mail or free magazines in its Flint, Mich., office, while Air Products & Chemicals, Allentown, Pa., says it screens junk mail and often throws out most of a given mass mailing. 

Why the revolt?
Anybody with a mailbox can answer that: sheer, overwhelming, mind-numbing volume.
According to the Direct Marketing Association, total direct mail -- to both businesses and consumers -- jumped 50% to 65.4 billion pieces in 1988 from five years earlier.
Though direct mail to businesses isn't broken out separately, the association says it's growing even faster. 

The deluge has spurred cost-conscious companies to action, with mail rooms throwing the stuff out rather than taking the time or money to deliver it. 

The direct-mail industry, not surprisingly, is fuming at the injustice of it all.
After all, this is the industry that has a hard enough time getting any respect, that is the butt of so many jokes that television's "L.A.Law" portrays direct-mail-mogul David as short, bald, intensely nerdy, and unremittingly boring. 

The practice of businesses throwing out junk mail "is a commonly known problem, and it's increasing as companies attempt to put through budget cuts across the board," right down to the mail-room level, says Stephen Belth, a list consultant and chairman of the Direct Marketing Association's business-to-business council. "But it's like biting the hand that feeds them, because every one of these companies uses direct marketing." 

It's almost impossible to track the number of companies trashing junk mail, since the decision is usually made in the mail room -- not the board room.
And the practice often varies from location to location even within a company.
But industry executives say businesses seem especially inclined to dump mailers sent to titles rather than to individual names. 

Motorola's Austin operation was one of the first to lose patience, deciding a few years ago to junk any bulk mail that wasn't addressed to an individual.
Magazines aren't delivered at all, even if an individual's name is listed; employees who want their magazines have to pick them up from the mail room or the company library -- and are told to change the subscriptions to their home addresses. 

At Air Products, meanwhile, the mailroom staff opens junk mail and often throws it away -- even if addressed to an individual. "If they get 50 packets of something, they open one, see what it says, throw 48 away and send two to people or departments they think are appropriate," a spokesman says. 

Direct marketers were especially alarmed when General Motors -- one of the country's largest companies and a big direct-mail user itself -- entered the junk-mail battle.
As of March 1, its Flint office, with about 2,500 employees, stopped delivering bulk mail and non-subscription magazines.
Employees were told that if they really wanted the publications, they would have to have them sent home instead.
The reason: overload, especially of non-subscription magazines. 

Direct-mail executives see GM's stand as an ominous sign -- even if the junk-mail kings did bring it on themselves. "Why anyone would want to close themselves off {from direct mail}, a priori, doesn't make any sense," says Michael Bronner of Bronner Slosberg Associates, a Boston directmail firm. "It smacks of big brotherism.
They're going to decide what their employees can or cannot read." 

The practice is, however, legal in most cases.
Jack Ellis, a U.S. postal inspector in New York, says the Postal Service's only job is to deliver the mail to the mail room; once it gets there, a company can do with it what it wishes. 

The junk-mail titans, ever optimistic, are looking for ways around the problem.
So far, they say, it hasn't had any noticeable effect on response rates.
And before it does, they're trying to cut back on the clutter that created the situation in the first place.
Among other things, the industry is trying to come up with standardized business lists that cut down on duplications. "We're going to have to mail a lot less and a lot smarter," says Jack Miller, president of Quill Corp., a Lincolnshire, Ill., business-to-business mail-order company.
But then again, mailing less and smarter won't be much help if the mail ends up in the garbage anyway. 

New Hyundai Campaign 

Hyundai Motor America, fighting quality complaints, declining sales and management turmoil, yesterday unveiled its 1990 ad strategy, tagged "We're Making More Sense Than Ever." 

The ad campaign, created by Saatchi & Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates agency, is an extension of the auto company's "Cars That Make Sense" campaign, which emphasized affordability.
TV ads plugging the company's new V-6 Sonata and its souped-up Excel subcompact will begin appearing Monday. 

One spot shows a Sonata next to a rival midsized car, and an announcer says, "Listen to what they're saying about the Hyundai Sonata." As the announcer reads favorable quotes about the model from Motor Trend and Road & Track magazines, the other car, which is white, slowly turns green. "No wonder the competition's green with envy," the announcer says. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

ACQUISITION: EWDB, formed by the merger of Eurocom and Della Femina McNamee WCRS, said it agreed to buy Vizeversa, an agency in Barcelona.
Terms weren't disclosed. 

HOLIDAY ADS: Seagram will run two interactive ads in December magazines promoting its Chivas Regal and Crown Royal brands.
The Chivas ad illustrates -- via a series of pullouts -- the wild reactions from the pool man, gardener and others if not given Chivas for Christmas.
The three-page Crown Royal ad features a black-and-white shot of a boring holiday party -- and a set of colorful stickers with which readers can dress it up.
Both ads were designed by Omnicom's DDB Needham agency. 

