.START 

Regarding your Oct. 4 page-one article "Bad Blood" on the generic-drug battle: The Epilepsy Institute is not just a patient-advocacy organization.
It is primarily a certified outpatient treatment facility providing comprehensive services to people with epilepsy and their families.
The institute's advocacy efforts are based on the needs of the population it serves and represents. 

In 1985, the Medical Tribune reported that a growing number of critics are challenging the FDA bioequivalence-therapeutic-equivalence equation. "They contend it is based on an assumption that has not yet been proven in valid tests," the Tribune said. 

In 1986, some institute patients were reporting breakthrough seizures when they were switched from a specific brand-name medication to a generic one or from one generic manufacturer of a specific product to another.
In addition, neurologists were beginning to report these observations as well.
Call it anecdotal if you will.
But no ethical physician would switch patients who were doing well on a specific medication from a specific manufacturer to prove a point. 

We do not depend on pharmaceutical companies for our support.
The institute has governmental service contracts for the provision of direct patient services; collects patient fees; receives money through contributions from individuals, foundations and bequests.
The funds received from pharmaceutical firms are used to offset physician symposiums, and these symposiums do not stress any particular medication or manufacturer. 

The Epilepsy Institute's reporting of breakthrough seizures stemmed from concerns about the people we treat and care about daily.
This perhaps was perceived as a "bold" stance, and thus suspicious.
But let us not confuse profits of big business masquerading as concerns for people's health care or for the cost.
For whom is the saving?
Surely not to people with epilepsy who depend on the same levels of medication in their bloodstream daily to maintain seizure control. 

Reina Berner 

Executive Director 

Arnold M. Katz 

President, Board of Directors The Epilepsy Institute New York 

