.START 

Merksamer Jewelers Inc., a fast-growing jewelry store chain, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection from creditors, apparently to speed a management buy-out of the chain. 

The filing, made yesterday in U.S. Bankruptcy Court here, follows an agreement by L.J. Hooker Corp., Merksamer's owner, to sell the chain to management for an undisclosed price.
GE Capital Corp., a financial services subsidiary of General Electric Co., is providing Merksamer management with $15 million in financing. 

L.J. Hooker, based in Atlanta, filed for Chapter 11 protection in August and has also announced its intention to sell its B. Altman & Co. department store chain.
L.J. Hooker is owned by Hooker Corp., Sydney, Australia, which itself is currently being managed by a court-appointed provisional liquidator. 

L.J. Hooker's planned sale of Merksamer is subject to approval by Judge Tina Brozman of U.S. Bankruptcy Court. 

Rumors to the effect that the Merksamer chain would file for Chapter 11 arose last week in the jewelry industry.
At that time, Sam Merksamer, president of the chain, angrily denied that his company was about to file.
Mr. Merksamer is leading the buy-out. 

According to executives close to the situation, Merksamer filed for Chapter 11 to speed the sale of the chain.
One executive said an accord signed by the unsecured creditors of L.J. Hooker Corp. had frozen in place all of L.J. Hooker's assets. 

The Merksamer bankruptcy-law filing appears to supersede that agreement. "By filing for Chapter 11, the Merksamer chain will only need approval from a bankruptcy judge for the sale, not the hundreds of unsecured creditors," said this executive. "The cash from the sale will go to L.J. Hooker, but the company itself will belong to Sam Merksamer." 

Mr. Merksamer and Sanford Sigoloff, chief executive of L.J. Hooker, were unavailable for comment.
In a statement, Mr. Merksamer described the filing as a "legal technicality," but also said that "our inability to obtain trade credit, combined with a need to ensure that our stores were properly stocked for the Christmas season, necessitated our filing Chapter 11." 

The jewelry chain, which is based in Sacramento, Calif., had revenue of $62 million and operating profit of $2.5 million for the year ended June 30. 

