.START 

Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan told Congress that the Fed can wipe out inflation without causing a recession, but he said doing so will inflict some short-term pain and will require reducing the federal deficit sharply. 

Mr. Greenspan said he and other Fed governors endorse a bill by Rep. Stephen Neal (D., N.C.) that would require the Fed to pursue policies aimed at eliminating inflation within five years. "Such a deadline is attainable, but it would have costs," Mr. Greenspan told Rep. Neal's monetary policy subcommittee. 

The Fed chief opposed a bill-introduced by Reps. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.) and Byron Dorgan (D., N.D.) -- that, among other things, would require the Fed to disclose all monetary policy moves immediately and increase outside scrutiny of the Fed. 

In responding to questions, Mr. Greenspan played down reports of tension between the Fed and the Treasury over exchange-rate policy. 

"What seem to be interpreted as great conflicts are relatively minor issues of tactics," he said.
He didn't elaborate.
But the Fed isn't enthusiastic about Treasury efforts to bring down the value of the dollar through intervention in foreign-exchange markets, and the Treasury is frustrated at the Fed's reluctance to cut interest rates to pull down the dollar's value. 

Mr. Greenspan said the inflation rate, currently about 4 1/2%, "could be brought down to levels which are close to zero without putting the economy into a recession, but I do suspect that there might be some modest loss of economic output." In other words, economic growth would be lower and unemployment would be higher for a few years.
But Mr. Greenspan, who has repeatedly said the Fed's goal is to reduce inflation, added that "whatever losses are incurred in the pursuing of price stability would surely be more than made up in increased output thereafter." 

He warned that Fed efforts to conquer inflation would fail -- and could produce "a major financial crunch" -- unless they are accompanied by a significant reduction in the federal deficit, which causes the government to borrow heavily. 

Rep. Neal's bill originally called on the Fed to reduce the inflation rate by one percentage point a year for five years and to maintain a zero inflation rate thereafter.
He altered the wording to win Mr. Greenspan's endorsement.
Even so, his bill is given little chance of passage. 

Reps. Hamilton and Dorgan also have altered their bill, dropping a proposal to add the Treasury secretary to the 12-member Fed committee that makes monetary policy.
Instead, the bill simply calls for twice-a-year meetings between the committee and top administration officials. 

Even that met with Mr. Greenspan's disapproval because it might subject the Fed "to a more intensely political perspective" and "could risk bending monetary policy away from long-term strategic goals." 

While each of the Hamilton-Dorgan proposals represents only a small step, together they would erode the Fed's independence, Mr. Greenspan said. 

Mr. Greenspan also said that although he favors cutting capital-gains taxes as sound economic policy, he would oppose such a move if it would undo the political compromise embodied in the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and result in higher marginal income tax rates. 

