.START 

Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Richard Breeden told a congressional subcommittee that he would consider imposing "circuit breakers" to halt program trading at volatile times. 

Mr. Breeden, in his first testimony to Congress since taking the SEC post, said the agency is studying the Friday the 13th market plunge, including how current circuit breakers affected the market that day and the following Monday.
After the study, the SEC would be willing to consider adding new circuit breakers or fine-tuning the current ones, he added. 

Circuit breakers, designed to give the markets a breather in cases of sharp price movements, curb trading of futures or stocks at various trigger points.
At certain points during the Friday the 13th drop, circuit breakers kicked in on the futures market, slowing trading at times.
A circuit breaker that would have closed down the New York Stock Exchange wasn't tripped. 

Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.), chairman of the House Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee, is pushing the idea of a circuit breaker for computer-driven program trading in hopes that would curb "turmoil" in the marketplace.
He argued that program-trading by roughly 15 big institutions is pushing around the markets and scaring individual investors. 

Mr. Breeden didn't reject the proposal.
After the SEC study of the drop is completed, he said, "I'm perfectly happy to work with this committee . . . in identifying whether we need other devices," such as a program-trading curb. 

Mr. Breeden backed most of the provisions in a market-reform bill that the SEC brought to the subcommittee last year under then-chairman David Ruder.
The measure is expected to move through this Congress.
But the new chairman vehemently opposed a provision in the bill that would give the agency the right to close the markets at times of stress. 

Mr. Breeden contended that uncertainty over when the SEC might act could worsen volatility in the markets.
He argued that the current circuit-breaker system allows investors to know "precisely when and where any trading interruptions will occur and how long they will last." 

Mr. Breeden offered strong support for two other provisions in the bill.
One would force brokerage houses to provide the SEC detailed information about loans made by their holding companies.
Such loans often are used to finance leveraged buy-outs, and the agency is worried that a sharp market drop could create capital problems for the firms. 

He also backed a rule to require large traders to report transactions on a systematic basis.
That information, he argued, is critical to reconstructing sharp market moves, such as the one nearly two weeks ago. 

