.START 

Many small investors are facing a double whammy this year: They got hurt by investing in the highly risky junk bond market, and the pain is worse because they did it with borrowed money. 

These people invested in "leveraged" junk bond mutual funds, the publicly traded funds that make a habit of taking out loans to buy extra junk. 

It's a good strategy in a rising market, where a 25% leveraged portfolio in effect allows investors to have 125% of their money working for them.
The strategy boosts current yield by putting more bonds into the portfolio. 

Trouble is, junk bond prices have been weak for months.
Thus, the leverage has amplified the funds' portfolio losses.
And shares of leveraged junk funds this year have been clobbered even harder than the junk bonds they hold. 

"That's really where the leverage hurt," says Thomas Herzfeld, a Miami-based investment manager who specializes in closed-end funds. "Share prices performed even worse than the funds' asset values because fear has taken hold" in the junk market, he says. 

Leverage is never a problem for the traditional "open end" mutual funds, which aren't publicly traded and aren't allowed to use leverage at all.
Leverage is used only by some of the closed-end funds. 

The usual maneuver is to borrow against the portfolio value or issue preferred stock, using the proceeds to buy additional bonds.
The fallout for investors lately has been painful. 

Consider the New America High Income Fund.
With a leveraged position of about 45%, the fund's share price has plunged 28.5% so far this year.
That's worse than the price drop sustained by the bonds in its portfolio, whose total return (bond-price changes plus interest) has amounted to a negative 6.08%. 

Such problems may not be over.
Leveraged funds in particular "are still extremely vulnerable, because we're still at the beginning of problems in the junk market," says George Foot, a managing partner at Newgate Management Associates in Northampton, Mass. 

Many investors are unaware their funds have borrowed to speculate in such a risky market. "If someone actually sat down and thought about what they were being sold," says Gerald Perritt, editor of the Mutual Fund Letter in Chicago, they might shy away. 

In a typical leverage strategy, a fund tries to capture the spread between what it costs to borrow and the higher return on the bonds it buys with the borrowed money.
If the market surges, holders can make that much more profit; the leverage effectively acts as an interest-free margin account for investors. 

But when the market moves against the fund, investors lose more than other junk holders because the market decline is magnified by the amount the fund is leveraged. 

Fund managers, for their part, defend their use of leverage.
Carl Ericson, who runs the Colonial Intermediate High Income Fund, says the fund's 25% leverage has jacked up its interest income. "As long as I am borrowing at 9.9% and each {bond} yields over that, it enhances the yield," he maintains.
Mr. Ericson says he tries to offset the leverage by diversifying the fund's portfolio. 

Yet some funds have pulled in their horns.
New America High Income Fund recently said that it plans to reduce its leverage position by buying back $5 million in preferred stock and notes from investors.
The fund made a similar move earlier this year. 

"We are trying to increase our flexibility," says Ellen E. Terry, a vice president at Ostrander Capital Management, the fund's investment adviser.
She declined to elaborate and wouldn't disclose the fund's recent purchases, sales or cash position. 

Ms. Terry did say the fund's recent performance "illustrates what happens in a leveraged product" when the market doesn't cooperate. "When the market turns around," she says, "it will give a nice picture" of how leverage can help performance. 

Several leveraged funds don't want to cut the amount they borrow because it would slash the income they pay shareholders, fund officials said.
But a few funds have taken other defensive steps.
Some have raised their cash positions to record levels.
High cash positions help buffer a fund when the market falls. 

Prospect Street High Income Portfolio, for instance, now holds about 15% in cash and equivalents, nearly quintuple the amount it held earlier this year, says John Frabotta, portfolio co-manager.
He says the fund, which is 40% leveraged, has maintained a "substantial cushion" between its borrowing costs and the yields of the portfolio's bonds. "I don't want to be in a position to have to sell," Mr. Frabotta says. 

Other funds have recently sold weak junk bonds to raise cash.
At the 50%-leveraged Zenith Income Fund, portfolio manager John Bianchi recently dumped Mesa Petroleum, Wickes and Horsehead Industries, among others, to raise his cash position to a record 15%. 

"That's a problem because cash isn't earning us very much money," Mr. Bianchi says.
He concedes: "This is the most difficult market that I've been involved in." 

Because of the recent junk-market turmoil, the fund is considering investing in other issues instead, including mortgage-backed bonds. 

"We're looking at the leverage factor every day," says Robert Moore, president of Bernstein-Macaulay Inc., a Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. unit and the fund's adviser. "At some point, if we are unable to cover our leveraged cost -- and at the moment we're right on it -- we're going to have to make a move." 

