.START 

Robert H. Knight's Oct. 5 editorial-page article bemoaning violence in comedy movies ("Hollywood, You Slay Me") is interesting, but somewhat off-base. 

As a fan of older movies from the 1920s on, I do not find modern comedies contain violence, sex and foul language to any greater degree than other recent movies.
Older movies have plenty of violence, though it is portrayed in keeping with the more restrictive social conventions of the time.
For example, one of my favorite movies is the 1949 British comedy "Kind Hearts and Coronets," in which the entire comedy is based on actor Dennis Price's murdering eight titled relatives (all played by Alec Guinness) because they snubbed his mother and stand in the way of his acquiring the family title.
Similarly, one of the most popular comedy genres of the 1930s and '40s was the "murder mystery/ comedy." The "Thin Man" series of movies, as well as many others, based their entire comedic appeal on the star detectives' witty quips and puns as other characters in the movies were murdered. 

Further, I think Mr. Knight made a poor choice in picking "A Fish Called Wanda" as an example of the deplorable state of modern comedy movies.
The specific scene he mentions in which pet dogs are crushed is somewhat reminiscent of the continual plights that befall the coyote in the old Warner Bros. "Road Runner" cartoons.
There is no slow-motion close-up, blood-and-guts portrayal of the animal's demise.
Keep in mind that this is the same movie in which a character is flattened by a steamroller only to pop right back up and peer in the window of a Boeing 747 -- from the outside -- as it takes off. 

I will be the first to agree that there is much to be found wrong with modern movie making.
Many modern scriptwriters seem to be incapable of writing drama, or anything else, without foul-mouthed cursing.
Sex and violence are routinely included even when they are irrelevant to the script, and high-tech special effects are continually substituted for good plot and character development.
In short, we have a movie and television industry that is either incapable or petrified of making a movie unless it carries a PG-13 or R rating.
Hence copious amounts of gratuitous sex, violence and gutter language are included as a crutch.
However, these faults are not the exclusive property of modern comedies, and I believe Mr. Knight errs when he attempts to link this modern phenomenon too closely to a single category of movie making. 

Michael Smith 

St. Louis 

