.START 

One day after Delmed Inc. made top management changes and disclosed the end of an important business tie, its stock didn't trade and the company forecast a "significant" drop next year in sales of its core product. 

That disclosure came, a Delmed spokeswoman said, after the American Stock Exchange alerted the company that trading wouldn't resume in its stock until additional information about developments was provided. 

In addition to the forecast, the company also said it is examining potential cost cuts and reductions in overhead.
The spokeswoman said the exchange would resume trading of Delmed stock today. 

Delmed, which makes and sells peritoneal dialysis products used in treating kidney disease, on Tuesday announced the resignations of Robert S. Ehrlich, chairman, president and chief executive officer, and of Leslie I. Shapiro, chief operating officer and chief financial officer.
They were succeeded by executives of Fresenius USA Inc. and its parent, Fresenius AG, which owns about 45% of Delmed. 

At the same time, the New Brunswick, N.J., company said negotiations about pricing and volumes of product had collapsed between it and its exclusive distributor in the U.S., National Medical Care Inc. Following that announcement Tuesday, however, company officials were unavailable to elaborate. 

Yesterday, the spokeswoman said sales of Delmed products through the exclusive arrangement with National Medical accounted for 87% of Delmed's 1988 sales of $21.1 million.
The current distribution arrangement ends in March 1990, although Delmed said it will continue to provide some supplies of the peritoneal dialysis products to National Medical, the spokeswoman said. 

Nonetheless, "Delmed currently expects that 1990 sales . . . will be significantly below their 1989 level," the company said in a statement. 

Delmed said yesterday that Fresenius USA would begin distributing the product and that the company is investigating other possible distribution channels.
In any case, supplies to patients won't be interrupted, the company added. 

Fresenius, a West German pharmaceutical concern, has been discussing a transaction in which it would buy Delmed stock for cash to bring its beneficial ownership to between 70% and 80%.
The transaction also would combine Fresenius USA and Delmed. 

But the plan now is being "reformulated," Delmed said, declining to provide most of the new terms of the combination.
Said the spokeswoman: "The whole structure has changed.
The value of the company has changed." 

Delmed did say that the proposal still would infuse cash into Delmed but less than the $10 million originally expected.
Delmed also would receive the North American rights to certain Fresenius AG products. 

Another option for Delmed, the company said, is that it could sell its plant in Ogden, Utah.
It added that no discussions about such a sale are under way. 

