.START 

The White House has decided to push for changes in pesticide law that are designed to speed the removal of harmful chemicals from the nation's food supply. 

The proposed changes, which are scheduled to be announced today, would apply to pesticides and other substances found on fresh and processed foods, according to federal officials.
Environmental groups have been calling for faster action on dangerous pesticides and may welcome part of the proposal. 

But they are already objecting to, among other things, a plan to give more weight to cost-benefit considerations in evaluating pesticides."It's a tremendous disappointment," said Janet Hathaway, an attorney with the Natural Resources Defense Council. "Allowing the EPA to condone continued use of a chemical whenever the benefits outweigh the risks is absolutely anathema to the environmental community." 

The Bush administration plans to announce a series of principles and to work with congressional leaders in writing specific legislative proposals that embody them.
The principles would give the Environmental Protection Agency increased authority and flexibility in regulating pesticides, with the aim of enabling the agency to move more quickly.
There already are proposals pending in Congress to overhaul pesticide law. 

Moves to accelerate the removal of dangerous pesticides gained new impetus during this year's Alar scare, when the EPA was harshly criticized for failing to yank the possible carcinogen, a growth regulator used to make apples redder and crunchier.
The agency has since acted to remove Alar from the nation's grocery shelves by May 31, 1991, and the apple industry has said that growers already have stopped using the chemical. 

In addition, the principles attempt to eliminate the so-called Delaney Paradox.
Under the Delaney clause, which applies to processed food, a chemical is banned if it causes cancer in laboratory animals.
Under other laws applying to pesticide use, however, that same chemical could be allowed to be used on fresh food if it fell within the EPA's tolerance level. 

Among other changes, the White House wants to: 

-- Give the EPA more flexibility to declare a pesticide an imminent hazard and pull it from the marketplace. 

-- Speed up the process for removing a pesticide that isn't an imminent hazard. 

-- Bar states from setting more stringent tolerance levels for a pesticide once the federal government has set a standard. 

-- Give the EPA added discretion to set "negligible risk" levels for pesticide residues in processed food.
Chemicals that exceed these risk levels would be barred, but those that fall below these levels would be allowed. 

-- Allow the EPA to permit the continued use of pesticides that exceed its negligible risk standard if the benefits of doing so outweigh the cost. 

