.START 

"Parenthood," this summer's successful and amusing movie about parents and children, apparently was only the beginning.
It seems that every day a new movie opens featuring a child coping with a mother's death, or adoption, or aging parents, or pregnancy.
And why not?
Some of our best and most idiosyncratic film makers -- from Truffaut to Fellini to Woody Allen -- have taken a cue from Chekhov: When it comes to compelling drama, there's no place like home. 

Yet too many people working in Hollywood today seem to suffer from the delusion that the drama played out in every home will be interesting to people who live somewhere else.
This is not the case.
Some diaries simply aren't worth snooping in. 

Yet there will be people who will sob at "Immediate Family," a limply constructed and offensive movie about adoption.
These are the sensitive souls who can empathize with and even enjoy hearing about other people's troubles, no matter how haltingly or predictably the sad tale is told. 

Written by Barbara Benedek, co-author of "The Big Chill," "Immediate Family" takes the position that only rich people living in nice houses should have children.
The film makers have couched this offensive idea in pretty packaging.
Everyone is very nice and good-looking -- the adoptive parents (Glenn Close and James Woods) and the teen-age couple who decide to give up their baby for adoption (Mary Stuart Masterson and Kevin Dillon). 

Linda and Michael (Ms. Close and Mr. Woods), who seem to be pushing 40, live in a large and tastefully decorated home in suburban Seattle.
All of their friends have children and they can't, so now they want a child more than anything -- perhaps even more than Michael wanted his fancy convertible or his deluxe stereo equipment.
The idea of a child-as-required-yuppie-possession must be motivating them, since the wealthy offspring of their friends are shown to be rude brats, in therapy by age five. 

Having exhausted all modern aids to fertility, Linda and Michael decide to adopt.
The actors wear pained expressions to indicate their genuine longing for a little one -- or maybe they're not-so-subtly commenting on the inadequacy of the script, and Jonathan Kaplan's ("The Accused") dull direction.
Or maybe they are disgusted by the literal-minded musical score; when a character arrives at a major decision her thoughts are revealed by the sound of "I Can See Clearly Now." The adoption agency insists on introducing the adopting parents to the birth mother, so Linda and Michael pay for pregnant Lucy's (Ms. Masterson) bus ticket from Ohio. (Why in these movies is the unwed pregnant woman always from Ohio?
I ask this not necessarily as a native Ohioan.) Lucy, of course, is pretty and smart, though uneducated.
Everyone falls in love with everyone else.
There is some pain, when Lucy has the baby and "didn't know she would feel like this" and wants to keep the baby.
But in the end, everything turns out for the best, in the film makers' warped view.
Like lawyers in the hostile takeover field, the baby goes where the money is. 

At the other end of the life cycle is "Dad," Gary David Goldberg's adaptation of the William Wharton novel.
This picture is about a middle-aged son who makes sure that his delayed bond with his father will last by waiting to cement it until just before the old man dies. 

The glib emotional style Mr. Goldberg has perfected on television's "Family Ties" doesn't benefit from magnification.
His characters practically scamper through a vast range of human emotions, like travelers doing 10 cities in eight days.
They pause only to register little whimpers of distress and sighs of satisfaction, like tourists cataloging the sights they've seen from the window of a bus.
Not even Jack Lemmon's expert doddering makes this trip worth taking. 

So it's entirely possible that "Look Who's Talking" isn't as entertaining as it seems in comparison to the turgid other films opening now.
But by comparison, this fluffy comedy seems like a gem.
It starts with conception, taking the sperm's point of view, then progresses to the baby's point of view.
Bruce Willis's best attribute as an actor is his coy, lazy voice, and that's all you get of him here, speaking for the baby. 

Finally, there is one family movie that quite eloquently explores the depth of human emotion -- only its stars are bears.
For the second time, in a movie called "The Bear," French director Jean-Jacques Annaud demonstrates just how powerful pictures can be. ("Quest for Fire" was the first time.) To be sure, one wonders what kind of man is this, who feels compelled to try to understand the most primitive longing and instinct in a way that requires the most sophisticated appreciation of visual storytelling.
Supposedly, he proposed the movie to his producer, Claude Berri, in four lines: "An orphan bear cub.
A big solitary bear.
Two hunters in the forest.
The animals' point of view." 

But then, even a great many words couldn't summarize the extraordinary pull of this movie about an orphaned bear who adopts a parent. 

Video Tip: One of the best movies about the child-parent thing in recent years was "Raising Arizona," the 1987 Coen brothers' comedy that definitely was not about the folks next door. 

