.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

TAX SHELTERS CALLED Individual Retirement Accounts, or "IRAs," were created without fanfare on Sept. 2, 1974, but grew beyond expectations as an inducement to personal saving. 

That Labor Day, in his first major act after succeeding the resigned Richard Nixon as president, Gerald R. Ford signed the Employee Retirement Income Security Act.
Pension reform was its main thrust.
Labor and business leaders, quoted at the White House Rose Garden rites, hailed its provisions for insuring corporate pension benefits.
IRAs were like stepchildren there. 

The IRA's conception is murky.
In 1972, then Treasury Secretary George Shultz, with the key support of Sen. Carl Curtis, sought some form of pensions for the uncovered.
That year a four-man group headed by William Lieber in the Legislation and Regulations division of the Office of the Chief Counsel for the Internal Revenue Service, was assigned the task of designing a plan. 

They used the 1962 Keogh Plan, a pension plan created by a New York congressman for the self-employed, as a partial model.
This team initially called its new model Personal Retirement Account, or "PRA." But it didn't sing.
So they opted for IRA, naming it after Ira Cohen, a brilliant IRS actuary who helped them.
Ira, himself, confirms this account. 

IRA rules have been changed over the years.
One in 1981 raised to $2,000 a year from $1,500 the amount a person could put, tax-deductible, into the tax-deferred accounts and widened coverage to people under employer retirement plans.
This caused an explosion of IRA promotions by brokers, banks, mutual funds and others.
But in 1986 Congress sharply reduced the number of people who could qualify for its benefits and IRA tax-deductions slowed their roaring growth. 

IRA account assets have grown to about $400 billion from $393 billion last year and just $26 billion in 1981. 

