.START 

The Canadian government, with a view to becoming more politically active in Latin America, is expected to announce tomorrow its application to join the Organization of American States, a Washington-based regional agency. 

The expected Canadian move has been welcomed by the Bush administration even though Canada has opposed such U.S. actions as the trade embargo against Cuba, the invasion of Grenada and the military support for Nicaragua's Contra guerrillas. 

Latin American countries have long urged Canada to join the OAS in the hopes that it would be a counterweight to the U.S., which for many years tended to dominate the 32-nation organization. 

Even though the U.S. also has supported Canadian membership, it hasn't been a Washington priority. "The fact that we might not side with the Americans may be a reason why Canada's membership in the OAS hasn't been, over the years, an item high on the U.S. agenda," said Allan Gotlieb, former Canadian ambassador to the U.S. 

The Canadian application is expected to be announced in San Jose, Costa Rica, by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who is attending a centenary celebration of Costa Rican democracy. "Canada has a larger and more beneficial role to play in the hemisphere," Mr. Mulroney said recently. 

Some Canadian political commentators have opposed Canada's joining what they see as a U.S.-dominated organization. "Canada could do plenty of things to get serious about Latin America without running the risk of getting caught in the cross fire" between the U.S. and Latin American members of the OAS, said Jeffrey Simpson, a columnist in Toronto's Globe & Mail newspaper. 

Canada, at times, could be an awkward OAS partner for the U.S. if its United Nations voting record is an indication.
In U.N. General Assembly votes last year, Canada voted the same as the U.S. only 63% of the time.
France voted the same as the U.S. 76% of the time, West Germany 79% and Britain 83%. 

Larry Birns, director of the Washington-based Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberal research group, said that Latin American countries would be "profoundly disappointed" if Canada were to follow the U.S. lead in the OAS. "Latin Americans see Canada as a non-interventionist power that respects their sovereignty," he said. 

The OAS, which tries to promote peace and economic development within the Americas, is attempting to find a settlement of the current Panama political crisis.
Cuba has been suspended from OAS membership, but the organization's members are discussing Cuba's reinstatement. 

