.START 

Office Market Weakens 

In Overbuilt Northeast 

THE NORTHEAST office market is feeling serious aftereffects of the giddy overbuilding of the 1980s. 

Foreclosures and other signs of financial distress, most often associated with the real estate market in the Southwest, are surfacing in the suburban office market of the once thriving Northeast. 

Some projects are now in the hands of lenders, including a 425,000-square-foot office facility in Little Falls, N.J.
The owners of a 32-acre hotel and office complex in King of Prussia, Pa., have advertised for new financing.
Rising office vacancy rates in Fairfield County, Conn., have builders and bankers scrambling to restructure loans.
And in suburban Boston, developers are bracing for cutbacks in the computer industry, a major user of office space. 

Many troubled properties haven't been foreclosed on and are hard to identify, says Albert I. Berger, who heads the Secaucus, N.J., office of Helmsley-Spear Inc., a real estate brokerage.
Owners are voluntarily -- and quietly -- turning over properties to lenders through "deeds in lieu of foreclosure." Often, developers stay on as property manager. 

Real estate analyst Lloyd Lynford says the Northeast's distress is masked by relatively low vacancy rates.
But in today's overbuilt market, tenants have many choices and are negotiating low rents that squeeze building owners.
On average, Mr. Lynford says, it now takes three to 3 1/2 years to fill new office space, compared with 2 1/2 years in 1988. 

Beverly Hills Comes 

To Suburban Tokyo 

WHY SHOULD the Japanese cross the Pacific to buy American real estate when they can simply recreate it at home? 

Tokyu Development Corp. is spending $500 million to build American-style luxury homes in suburban Tokyo with rarely seen back yards, front yards, swimming pools and tennis courts. 

The Japanese company hired Richardson Nagy Martin, a Newport Beach, Calif., architectural firm, to design what the Japanese press has dubbed "the Beverly Hills of Tokyo." Instead of Japan's typical small homes clustered on narrow streets with no sidewalks, the new "One Hundred Hills" development will offer 65 houses on half-acre lots.
That's more than 10 times the usual housing site size. 

Buyers with $6 million to spend can select from 11 designs, including a Mediterranean-inspired California style, a traditional Yankee look and designs inspired by Midwestern architect Frank Lloyd Wright.
There are spacious living rooms and baths, plus a master grandparents suite and a foyer for removing shoes to suit Japanese life styles. 

Exteriors are faced with brick, wood or stone, but the homes are made of steel-reinforced concrete. "We were disappointed we couldn't use wood," says architect Walter J. Richardson, "but the Japanese only want stronger materials." At $1,000 per square foot, the Japanese want the feeling of indestructibility, he explains, not to mention protection from possible earthquake damage. 

Housing Developers Try 

Brand-Name Buildings 

RESIDENTIAL builders, faced with a more competitive market, are turning to a traditional consumer marketing technique to establish brand-name identity. 

"One of the difficulties people in real estate have is that each product is like starting a new company, or starting a new line in the fashion business," says L. Robert Lieb president of Mountain Development Corp. in West Paterson, N.J.
So he's using "river" in many project names. "It'll never be like what Bristol-Myers does," he adds, "but it helps establish recognition with the public -- and with banks." 

Weingarten-Siegel Group Inc. of Manalapan, N.J., has built Cross Creek Pointe, Allegro Pointe and other Pointes in New Jersey.
Caspi Development Corp of Armonk, N.Y., has developed two apartment buildings called Classic and plans a third.
Developer Steve Caspi says the same brand name indicates consistent quality, "regardless of location, design or amenities." 

The leader in real estate brand names is developer Ara Hovnanian.
His entry-price condos are labeled Society Hill.
Beacon Hill is for "move-up" town houses, and Nob Hill, for single-family houses.
Because of standardized designs, Mr. Hovnanian says, "a buyer can visualize Society Hill regardless of where it is." 

Quake Not Likely to Jolt 

The Commercial Market 

THE EARTHQUAKE in San Francisco has sent few tremors through the hearts of real estate investors. 

"I think there's a disease called buyer's regret, and I'm sure it's running rampant at this moment, but it gets cured in a short period of time," says Kenneth Leventhal, co-managing partner of Kenneth Leventhal & Co,. a Los Angeles accounting firm specializing in real estate. "If I were buying a building in San Francisco now the first thing I'd do is insist on a structural inspection, then I'd delay a little, stall a little." 

But like other real estate professionals accustomed to California's quake risks, Mr. Leventhal anticipates little long-term change in the city's commercial real estate market. 

Still, local builders are eager to tell the world that most of San Francisco doesn't look like the TV images of destruction.
Planners of the Urban Land Institute real estate conference this week hastily added a panel on the quake's effects. "The message is we build'em right," says Peter Bedford, a California developer and officer at Urban Land Institute. "There's seven million square feet of space that's doing great." 

