.START 

Financial markets took a midweek break from their recent wild gyrations with stock prices falling modestly, bond prices posting tiny gains and the dollar almost unchanged. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 5.94 points to 2653.28 in moderate trading.
Long-term Treasury bonds rose slightly despite the arrival on the market of $4.52 billion in 30-year bonds offered by the Resolution Funding Corp. as part of the government's bailout of the savings and loan industry.
The dollar was barely changed against the West German mark and up marginally against the Japanese yen. 

Yesterday's sluggish action was in marked contrast to the rearing and plunging of stock prices Tuesday after the proposed buy-out of UAL Corp. once again collapsed.
Traders said the stock market's lurching moves have prompted many investors to head for the sidelines until it regains some semblance of stability. 

Although bond prices weren't as volatile on Tuesday trading as stock prices, traders nevertheless said action also was much slower yesterday in the Treasury market.
Bond investors paid close attention to comments by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, who was testifying before a congressional hearing, but weren't able to extract many clues about the future course of the Fed's monetary policy.
Many analysts are expecting the Fed to lower interest rates at least once more before the end of the year. 

Investors now are awaiting today's release of the preliminary estimate of third-quarter gross national product.
Economists predict the report will show economic growth of about 2.5% in the third quarter, which would have little effect on financial markets.
But an unexpected deviation either way could roil bond and currency markets. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices slipped lower in moderate trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 155.7 million shares.
But advancing issues on the Big Board were ahead of decliners 784 to 700. 

Bond prices inched higher.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue rose less than an eighth of a point, or less than $1.25 for each $1,000 of face amount.
The yield on the issue stood at 7.88%. 

The dollar was virtually unchanged.
In late New York trading the U.S. currency was quoted at 1.8353 marks and 141.52 yen, compared with 1.8355 marks and 141.45 yen Tuesday. 

