.START 

Call Jim Wright's office in downtown Fort Worth, Texas, these days and the receptionist still answers the phone, "Speaker Wright's office." 

The former congressman, who resigned as speaker of the House after an investigation of his financial dealings, is ensconced in his district office, maintained by taxpayers on a $200,000 allowance.
He is negotiating a rich book contract to boot. 

One of the hottest tickets on Washington's social calendar this fall was a charity benefit honoring former Congressman Tony Coelho, who landed a million-dollar job on Wall Street after resigning over a controversial junk-bond investment last summer. 

Michael Deaver, the former White House aide, has become the most recent addition to the teeming ranks of fallen politicians and officials earning their way as lobbyists and consultants here.
Mr. Deaver has reopened a public-relations business. 

Surviving scandal has become a rite of political passage at a time when a glut of scandal has blunted this town's sensibility.
Let the president demand strict new ethics rules: With four sitting House members accused of sexual misdeeds, amid the unfolding HUD scandal and after the Wright debacle, "people are slightly dulled by scandal," says political humorist Art Buchwald. "It now takes something really weird to inspire public outrage." 

Not all the scandal-tripped have enjoyed soft landings.
But many have. "These people bounce back more resiliently than regular people," says Washington writer Suzanne Garment, who is working on a history of post-Watergate scandal. 

Given their own penchant for book writing, it is surprising that none of the masters of scandal survival have yet published a guide to the art.
For there is an emerging protocol -- indeed, an etiquette -- to it.
Among the rules: 

Pretend Nothing Happened 

As if he were still in his old job, Mr. Wright, by resigning with his title instead of being forced from his job, by law enjoys a $120,000 annual office expense allowance, three paid staffers, up to $67,000 for stationery and telephones and continued use of the franking privilege.
Not to mention a generous federal pension.
There is also a busy schedule of speaking engagements at $10,000 a pop, at tony places including the Yale Political Union. 

"He's as busy as he was as speaker," reports Mr. Wright's administrative aide, Larry Shannon. 

Atone 

On the edge of fashionable Georgetown, in a chic office with a river view and a number of corporate clients whom he won't name, Mr. Deaver is trying to reclaim his reputation as one of the savviest image makers in town. 

There are few mementos of his days as White House deputy chief of staff and confidant of Ronald and Nancy Reagan.
The former $3 million-a-year lobbyist now frequents shelters for the homeless and devotes a third of his time counseling other recovering alcoholics. "I feel better than I ever have in my life," he says. 

Mr. Deaver confessed to his alcoholism during his trial on perjury charges.
He is also a recovering workaholic, relaxing with his family and creating topiary, or garden-shrub sculpture, a fashionable pursuit for which he developed a passion during his three-year legal ordeal.
One sign of Mr. Deaver's renaissance: an appearance on ABC's "Nightline" for a show on pack journalism.
Host Ted Koppel introduced him as "the media master of the Reagan Administration," with nary a mention of Mr. Deaver's conviction in 1987 on perjury charges. 

Finding God 

"When someone says, 'I've turned to God, ' everybody lays off," observes Frank Mankiewicz, an old Washington hand and former aide to Robert Kennedy.
Thus have Charles Colson and Jeb Magruder launched successful post-Watergate careers at the pulpit. 

But it doesn't always work so smoothly.
After allegations surfaced in a 1985 divorce contest that he had beaten his wife, SEC enforcement chief John Fedders retreated to a Trappist monastery in rural Virginia.
He is now in solo law practice in Washington, but his fees have been meager and he failed in efforts to win a chunk of his ex-wife's royalties on her tell-all book.
From time to time he returns to the monastery for prayer, meditation and pro bono legal work. 

Mr. Fedders is philosophical about his travails. "This whole experience has been an opportunity for internal growth," he says.
He sees a psychoanalyst five mornings a week. "I've surrendered to the circumstances," Mr. Fedders says. "The word surrender has a precise psychoanalytic meaning.
My universe has changed.
I'm enjoying my life and who I am today.
The aspect of being a mega-lawyer isn't as important." 

Don't Linger 

"The best thing you can do is get off the screen," says Mr. Buchwald.
Nobody proved that more masterfully than Mr. Coelho, the former Democratic majority whip.
Declaring that there was life after Congress, he resigned almost immediately after media reports questioned the propriety of a 1986 junk-bond investment, before any official investigations took hold. 

Among the glitterati who turned out in bipartisan black-tie force to benefit the Coelho Epilepsy Fund last month were Sen. Robert Dole, Rep. Newt Gingrich, and other kingpins of Congress.
Dan Rather served as emcee.
From his new, million-dollar-a-year perch on Wall Street as a managing director of Wertheim Schroder & Co., Mr. Coelho reports that many of his former colleagues have contacted him to find out how they, too, can pursue investment banking careers. 

It Helps to Be Male 

Male scandal victims invariably fare better.
Anne Burford, the former EPA chief who resigned under fire in 1983 during a flap with Congress, was kayoed in the confrontation, even though she was never charged with official wrondgoing.
She worked part-time as a consultant and wrote a book, but never restarted her high-powered legal career.
It didn't help when, in 1986, she was charged (and then cleared) on allegations of public drunkenness. 

"I cut my losses and ran," she says, from her new home in Colorado, where she is busy remodeling.
Mrs. Burford remains bitter over the overwhelming legal expenses involved in clearing her name. "My husband was instantly impoverished by the very act of marrying me," she says. 

Another former EPA official, Rita Lavelle, is still struggling after her conviction in 1983 on perjury charges. "There's nothing she could do to bring herself back to where she was," says her lawyer, James Bierbower. "You could say she survived, but it wasn't easy on her." 

No book contracts have been dangled before Deborah Gore Dean, the reigning queen of the HUD scandal.
Donna Rice of Gary Hart fame failed to obtain a book contract and lost her modeling contract for "No Excuses" jeans.
Fawn Hall, Oliver North's former secretary, has yet to launch a hoped-for television news career, according to her lawyer. 

Rita Jenrette, the former wife of Abscam-indicted Rep. John Jenrette, has yet to hit it big in Hollywood, although with roles in such movies as "Zombie Island Massacre" and "Aunt Ida's Bikini Shop," she is doing a lot better than her former husband.
He was back in jail over the summer on shoplifting charges. 

Be the Star 

Central figures -- such as Richard Nixon -- usually fare better than those with supporting roles.
Richard Secord, the retired Air Force general felled in the Iran-Contra scandal, is all but ruined -- forced to sell his Virginia home and pull his kids out of college, according to a recent fund-raising appeal sent out on his behalf.
Yet his co-defendant in the case -- also a former military officer by the name of Oliver North -- has been busily and profitably burnishing his involvement in the affair. 

What accounts for the difference?
During the televised Iran-Contra hearings, Mr. North came off as a patriot from central casting.
Mr. Secord's performance was decidedly less inspiring. 

Mr. North remains in heavy demand as a speaker, for fees reported in the $20,000 range.
Even in the wake of Hurricane Hugo 750 people turned out in a remote Virginia town in September for a "family tribute" to Mr. North given by two dozen conservative members of Congress. 

If Sex Is Involved, All Bets Are Off 

Sex scandals make people look careless and silly, and one of the worst sins in Washington is to be laughed at. "You can be wicked, but not foolish," says Mr. Mankiewicz. 

Nevertheless, Rep. Gerry Studds of Massachusetts was handily re-elected because of the candor with which he handled revelations that he had sex with a male congressional page in 1983. 

Former Rep. Robert Bauman, a Maryland Republican who lost his seat in 1980 after he was caught soliciting sex from a 16-year-old boy, has never regained his professional footing as a lawyer.
Mr. Bauman, a conservative, says he was deserted by the right wing. "Conservatives shoot their own," he says. 

If the political establishment is reluctant to forgive sexual misadventures, the private sector sometimes will.
John Tower was accused of womanizing and boozing during his unsuccessful bid to win confirmation as secretary of defense earlier this year.
Now he is writing a book, serving on an elite foreign policy advisory board and consulting for an array of corporate clients, including British publishing mogul Robert Maxwell. 

Become a Lobbyist 

When all else fails, Gucci Gulch -- the fabled halls of the Capitol inhabited by lobbyists and their imported shoes -- offers a welcome environment for fallen officials.
Former Rep. Fernand St Germain, brought down by the savings-and-loan crisis, now represents -- you guessed it -- savings-and-loans associations. 

Some become pseudo-lobbyists.
John Mack promptly quit his job last spring as an aide to Speaker Wright amid public outrage over Mr. Mack's violent attack on a young woman when he was 19 years old.
After a few weeks in seclusion, Mr. Mack opened a consulting firm, but not to enable him to directly lobby; that would require him to disclose his clients by registering as a lobbyist.
Still, Mr. Mack says he talks to "30 members of Congress a week." Misery Loves Company 

Other scandal survivors are sometimes the best source of solace.
Raymond Donovan, the New Jersey construction executive who was forced to resign as labor secretary and indicted in 1985, only to be acquitted of fraud charges, often calls other scandal-tossed public figures to offer a sympathetic ear.
Each time a new scandal hits, he says, "it pulls the scabs off your knees." 

One of the first people to come to the Deaver home after his troubles erupted was former Nixon aide John Ehrlichman, whom Mr. Deaver scarcely knew. "He reassured me that the hurricane would end," Mr. Deaver recalls. 

Mr. Bauman received an encouraging letter from the recognized master of scandal survival, Richard Nixon.
Says Mr. Bauman: "If things get really tough, I can always auction it off at Sotheby's." 

