.START 

For all of this year's explosive run-up in stock prices, Renaissance Investment Management Inc. 's computer sat on the sidelines.
Now it's on the fence. 

Renaissance, a Cincinnati-based money manager, began buying stocks again this week with half of the $1.8 billion that it oversees for clients, according to people familiar with the firm's revised strategy.
It was the first time since January that Renaissance has thought stocks are worth owning. 

Renaissance declined to confirm the move, but its stock purchases were thought to have begun Tuesday, timed to coincide with the maturity this week of Treasury bills owned by the firm.
The other half of its portfolio is expected to remain invested in Treasury bills for the time being. 

Wall Street executives said they believed that Renaissance's $900 million buy program was carried out by PaineWebber Inc.
As reported, PaineWebber bought shares Tuesday as part of a customer strategy shift, although the broker's client was said then to have been Japanese.
Yesterday, PaineWebber declined comment. 

When it owns stocks, Renaissance's portfolio typically is composed of about 60 large-capitalization issues; to make buy or sell moves, the firm solicits Wall Street brokerage houses a day or so in advance, looking for the best package price to carry out the trades.
The broker winning the business doesn't charge commissions, but instead profits by buying or selling for less than the overall package price. 

That puts the broker at risk if it's trying to buy stock in a rising market.
In Tuesday's gyrating session, the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell by 80 points early in the day, but finished with less than a four-point loss. 

Renaissance's last portfolio shift, carried out by Goldman, Sachs & Co., was a highly publicized decision last January to sell its entire stock portfolio and buy Treasury bills.
The sell signal, which sent a bearish chill through the stock market, came when Renaissance's computer found that stocks were overpriced compared with bonds and Treasury bills. 

At the time, the Dow Jones Industrial Average stood at about 2200.
The Dow average now stands more than 20% higher, while Renaissance's portfolio of Treasurys produced a return of about 6% through the first three quarters of the year.
The computer's miscalculation has been painful for Renaissance.
Almost any money manager holding stocks has turned in better results, while Renaissance has played it safe with Treasury bills. 

So why does Renaissance's computer like stocks with the Dow at 2653.28, where it closed yesterday, when it didn't with the Dow at 2200? 

"With the decline in stock prices and continued low or stable interest rates, stocks are representing a better value all the time," Renaissance President Frank W. Terrizzi said yesterday. 

Three-month T-bill yields have fallen to 7.8% from about 9% at the start of the year.
Stock prices, meanwhile, are about 140 points lower than the peak of 2791.41 reached on the Dow industrial average Oct. 9.
Are those declines enough to signal a partial return to stocks? 

Mr. Terrizzi won't say specifically, explaining that if there was such a move, it would take about three days to complete the loose ends of the transaction.
During that time, a buyer with the clout of a Renaissance could end up driving up the price of stocks it was trying to buy if it tipped its hand. 

But everything is relative to Mr. Terrizzi, so stocks in his view can become more attractive in comparison with bonds or T-bills, even if shares are more expensive than when they were sold in January. "Our {computer} model has a certain trigger point," he said. When the computer says switch, Renaissance switches. 

The firm has made 17 previous shifts from one type of asset to another in its 10-year history.
Almost all have involved at least half and often the firm's entire portfolio, as the computer searches for the most undervalued investment category, following a money-management style called tactical asset allocation. 

Competing asset-allocation firms march to their own computer models, so some have been partly or fully invested in stocks this year while Renaissance has sat on the sidelines.
As a result, competitors say Renaissance has been looking for any opportunity to return to the stock market, rather than risk losing business by continuing to remain fully invested in Treasury bills. 

Mr. Terrizzi confirms some clients have left Renaissance, but no major ones, and the firm has added new accounts. 

