.START 

After more than a year of losing accounts and watching its reputation slide, Ogilvy & Mather's New York office hired away a top creative executive from flashy Chiat/Day/Mojo as its creative head. 

Ogilvy, a unit of London-based WPP Group, named Bill Hamilton, 47, to the top creative post in New York.
Mr. Hamilton had been an executive vice president and creative head of Chiat/Day's New York office, known for its funky work for Arrow shirts, Nynex yellow pages and Anne Klein II.
At Ogilvy, he succeeds Norman Berry, who left the agency in June but now plans to return to the parent company, WPP. 

Chiat/Day said Lee Clow, the agency's president and chief creative director, will fill in as acting New York creative director until the naming of Mr. Hamilton's successor -- or possibly successors -- within the next few weeks. 

Mr. Hamilton faces a daunting task in reviving Ogilvy's stagnant New York office.
Just a few months ago, Maxwell House yanked its $50 million account from the office, following the loss last year of the $40 million Hallmark account.
The office has won just a single piece of new business -- and a tiny one, at that -- this year, and new business wins weren't substantial last year, either. 

The office is suffering from "a dead battery," as Alan Gottesman, an analyst with PaineWebber, puts it.
And while it can be turned around, he says, "It ain't easy, and it's been parked underneath a snowdrift for a very long time." 

The New York office is just one of many Ogilvy outposts, plenty of which are performing well.
But it is the largest and most visible.
With about $800 million in billings, it's bigger than most entire agencies.
And while it has won praise for some of its creative work, especially for American Express, it hasn't been able to attract substantial new business.
Ogilvy last spring hired Michael Lesser, 47, from Lowe Marschalk to head up the New York operations, but Mr. Lesser hasn't had a strong creative leader to work with him. 

Industry executives generally lauded the move to bring in Mr. Hamilton, saying the office needs a kick from the outside.
But they questioned whether there might be a culture clash between buttoned-up Ogilvy and Mr. Hamilton, an 11-year veteran of Chiat/Day's freewheeling, no-walls-no-doors culture.
Mr. Hamilton, after all, presided over -- among other things -- the weird U.B.U. Reebok campaign while at Chiat/Day.
Ogilvy creates more-mainstream ads for clients including American Express, Seagram and Mattel. 

But in an interview, Mr. Hamilton said a culture clash "is part of the agenda.
I think they want some infusion of a different attitude about how you go about communicating the advantages of a certain client." He added, "A certain amount of chaos is very good in agencies." And he said he hopes within three months to be "playing football in the halls at 5:30 in the afternoon." 

Mr. Hamilton talked broadly of some of the changes he'd like to make at Ogilvy.
Chiat/Day is one of the few American agencies to successfully use British account planning -- a method Ogilvy attempted briefly and largely unsuccessfully, and which Mr. Hamilton hopes to ultimately bring with him.
In account planning, an executive with a research background represents the consumer, working closely with creative and account executives.
Mr. Hamilton also said he might also bring over some Chiat/Day veterans, though from non-New York offices. 

Mr. Hamilton accepted the job after repeated discussions not just with Mr. Lesser, but with WPP Group's chief executive officer, Martin Sorrell, who has taken a hands-on approach with his acquisition. "I probably wouldn't have accepted the job had it not been the combination of Mike {Lesser} and Martin," he said. 

"I've always been intrigued by those things people say can't be done.
Most of the wags and the pundits of the world will say it's pretty tough stuff to turn around an agency that's been going in one direction for a long time," he said. "But I don't think it {the issue} is turning it around -- I think it's getting back to where it was 10 or 15 years ago.
There are pockets of brilliance there now." 

Kraft Taps Margeotes 

Kraft General Foods Group has asked Margeotes Fertitta & Weiss, a small New York agency, to try its hand at some creative work on a new product. 

A Kraft General Foods spokesman said Margeotes has been given an assignment to do "some development work on a venture project." Executives close to the Glenview, Ill.-based food giant said the work is for a new coffee beverage product currently in development. 

Margeotes, whose clients include Godiva and Maccabee beer, has had a string of new business wins.
It recently picked up the ad accounts for Haagen-Dazs, Newsday and for a number of jewelry lines from Crystal Brands. 

Separately, the Kraft General Foods spokesman said it selected D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, New York, to handle its Sealtest Free non-fat ice cream account.
Executives estimated that account is worth about $6 million.
The account had been handled by McCann-Erickson. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

LINTAS LAYOFFS: About 20 people were laid off at Lintas's Ceco Communications subsidiary in Warren, Mich., on Tuesday.
Dick O'Connor, chairman and chief executive of Lintas:Campbell-Ewald, said the office isn't growing as expected. 

