.START 

CONFRONTATIONS LOOM between Bush and Democrats in Congress. 

The early bipartisanship dissipates as issues become more contentious and the Democrats find their voice.
They begin to blame Bush's insistence on a capital-gains cut for the disarray in the budget process; one White House aide sees a "train wreck" coming.
The Democrats also increasingly lash Bush for timidity on Eastern Europe. 

White House advisers formally threaten vetoes of the foreign-aid and child-care bills and informally discuss a possible veto of the defense bill.
Child care could be an especially tough fight; after Bush's veto of abortion funding for rape and incest victims, anti-abortion lawmakers feel extra pressure to show attention to women's concerns. 

Bush still tries a personal touch; he golfs with Ways and Means Chairman Rostenkowski and meets privately with Senate Democrats. 

A "MUST-SIGN" BILL becomes a magnet for controversial proposals. 

To avoid missing Social Security payments, the government must get a raise in its borrowing limit by Nov. 8; the necessity of the measure attracts numerous attempts at adding unrelated measures to it.
Republicans will try to offer the capital-gains cut in the Senate; the Democrats probably have the votes to block it, though some fear brinksmanship on the bill. 

Other likely candidates for riders include revision of the Gramm-Rudman law, repeal of catastrophic-illness insurance, child care and other measures that were stripped off the recent budget-reconciliation bill.
Democratic leaders will try to keep them off, fearing that allowing any of them would weaken their argument against capital gains. 

BUSH TURNS the failed Panama coup to his advantage, at least for now. 

His complaints about secret restrictions on anti-Noriega plots put Congress on the defensive, even though the curbs didn't play a role in the coup's collapse.
Senate intelligence chiefs Boren and Cohen agree with the White House to loosen the rules; CIA agents stand to gain broad leeway to work with rebels, even if a coup might endanger Noriega's life. 

The next step: a new covert plan for unseating the dictator.
One possibility is more active American recruitment of rebels who would agree to hand Noriega to the U.S. and install the elected leaders he rebuffed.
The last coup plotters refused to do either. 

But Bush's handling of the previous attempt hobbles future efforts.
Noriega has purged potential enemies, and doubts grow about U.S. resolve. 

LAWMAKERS' PATIENCE wears thin over the CFTC's slow pace of reform after the "sting" operation that led to the spring indictments of 46 traders at two Chicago exchanges.
Incredulous senators grill Chairman Wendy Gramm about the fact that 11 of the traders are still handling customer accounts.
Nebraska Sen. Kerrey asks her: "Do you work full-time at this job?" 

THE PENTAGON BALKS at Darman's budget strategy of threatening to make the automatic Gramm-Rudman cuts permanent.
Pentagon brass worry it could mean sharp cutbacks in training, acquisition of spare parts and weapons development. "The impact for us could be appreciably worse than OMB has admitted in its maneuvering with Congress," says a Pentagon budget aide. 

NEW ALLY: Attorney General Thornburgh, back from the U.S.S.R., reports that the Soviets are now providing assistance and intelligence to the U.S. on international drug trafficking.
In exchange, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration is training several Soviet agents in drug enforcement. 

ORGAN-TRANSPLANT DOCTORS worry at HHS moves to assert control over the transplant system, currently overseen by a nonprofit group under federal contract.
The department decides to impose a 10-step review on new transplant policies.
Dr. Robert Corry, who heads the nonprofit group, says the move will "stifle innovative changes" and slow medical progress; he hopes to negotiate a compromise. 

ABORTION POLITICS shape legal as well as electoral agendas. 

Illinois Attorney General Neil Hartigan, whose gubernatorial campaign is under pressure from pro-choice forces, pursues a settlement of the current Supreme Court case challenging the state's tough restrictions on abortion clinics.
Agreement would sharply reduce the stakes in the court this term; the two remaining cases don't as directly challenge Roe vs.
Wade. 

Pennsylvania's new abortion law almost certainly will provide a Supreme Court test, but probably not until next year.
Abortion-rights activists plan a new series of major marches next month, but their biggest boost would come with a gubernatorial victory in Virginia, where black nominee Wilder is riding the pro-choice issue hard. 

The National Abortion Rights Action League, already running ads for Wilder, hits the airwaves today for New Jersey Democratic candidate Florio. 

MINOR MEMOS: Among documents in the HUD scandal: a handwritten 1987 letter from presidential son Jeb Bush to Deborah Dean, a central figure in the scandal, wishing her "every success in trying to clean up the federal government's act." . . . GOP Rep. Bentley writes business PACs promising to "lead the battle" against President Bush's proposal to abolish them -- and asking for money for her 1990 campaign. . . . Sen. Mitchell's advice to visiting Supreme Soviet members drawing up rules for their legislature: "Don't copy ours." 

