.START 

A simmering feud between the Thatcher government's two senior economic experts erupted with the abrupt resignation of Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson, sending shock waves through an already shaken financial community and prompting an emergency cabinet shuffle. 

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher named Foreign Secretary John Major to succeed Mr. Lawson.
Sir Geoffrey Howe, deputy prime minister, rushed out a statement in the House of Commons that the government's economic and monetary policies would remain "unchanged." Meanwhile, Sir Alan Walters, Mrs. Thatcher's controversial economic adviser and Mr. Lawson's nemesis, also announced his resignation. 

The pound, which has already slid about 10% against the West German mark in recent weeks, plunged further on the news.
In late New York trading yesterday, sterling was quoted at $1.5765, down sharply from $1.6145 late Wednesday.
And brokers were bracing for a grueling Friday in financial markets here. "You're going to get quite a major fall in the equity market and the gilt markets," said Gwyn Hacche, U.K. economist with James Capel & Co. "Markets hate uncertainty." 

Despite the Howe statement, the Thatcher government's economic policy appeared to be in chaos.
One major question is just how the government will handle matters on which Mr. Lawson and Sir Alan differed explosively.
The two men clashed bitterly over the importance of exchange rates in setting monetary policy and the wisdom of Britain fully joining the European Monetary System, which links together the major currencies in the European Community. 

Though jolted by the surrounding confusion, Mrs. Thatcher emerged in undisputed command of her government's economic program.
Neil Kinnock, Labor Party leader, dubbed the 46-year-old Mr. Major a "lap dog" unlikely to veer from his boss's strongly held views, as Mr. Lawson sometimes did. 

From the standpoint of the financial markets, however, the prime minister's positions seem murky -- in large part because she has presided over dueling advisers for the last six months. "I don't know where Thatcher stands," said Paul Horne, an economist with Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. in Paris. "She's played such a cat-and-mouse game with her advisers." 

Although sometimes arcane economic debates undergirded the Lawson-Walters rift, the 57-year-old Mr. Lawson's surprise departure boiled down to a simple stand of he-goes-or-I-go.
In his letter to Mrs. Thatcher, Mr. Lawson stated: "The successful conduct of economic policy is possible only if there is, and is seen to be, full agreement between the prime minister and chancellor of the exchequer.
Recent events have confirmed that this essential requirement cannot be satisfied so long as Alan Walters remains your personal economic adviser." 

The upheaval leaves the Thatcher government isolated within the European Community.
Six months ago, the British prime minister's two senior cabinet members -- Mr. Lawson, chancellor since 1983, and Sir Geoffrey, then the foreign secretary -- both supported Britain's early entry into the EMS.
With Mr. Lawson out of the cabinet, and Sir Geoffrey in the less-influential job of deputy prime minister, there's little to counter Mrs. Thatcher's innate suspicion of the EC's exchange-rate mechanism.
Sir Alan, brought back to Downing Street last spring as her adviser, adamantly opposed it. 

Indeed, the final fracas in the Lawson-Walters battle involved the EMS. Sir Alan, who also works in Washington, D.C., as a consultant to the World Bank and a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, said in a article to be published in a U.S. economic journal that the EMS was "half-baked." 

The scoff, coming from the man many consider Mrs. Thatcher's most influential adviser, sparked considerable worry.
It not only conflicted with Mr. Lawson's views but ran counter to the position Mrs. Thatcher took at the EC summit in Madrid last June.
There, she said that Britain would join the EMS once the EC had completely liberalized restrictions on capital movements and exchange controls, and once Britain's inflation rate had fallen into line with the rest of the EC. Economists expect those conditions to be met in 1990 or 1991. 

Mr. Lawson stated in a House of Commons debate this week that Sir Alan's views "aren't the view of the government." And in a subsequent television interview, he said, "I think it is right that advisers do not talk or write in public." 

Worn down by the feud, he then made it clear to Mrs. Thatcher that he expected the controversial adviser to be ousted.
In remarks in Commons yesterday afternoon, the prime minister disappointed him.
As she has done in the past, she stated her support for Mr. Lawson but insisted on keeping on an adviser who opposed and disparaged his policies. 

The EMS views of Mr. Major, who served as Mr. Lawson's deputy in 1987, aren't fully known.
Speaking in the House of Commons last night, he said of Mr. Lawson, "I was proud to serve in his team and proud that he has been and will remain a good friend." 

To a great extent, the Downing Street blow-up is the result of Mrs. Thatcher's management approach.
Fond of playing her senior advisers off against each other, the prime minister has often allowed rivalries and animosities to bubble up within her cabinet. 

Financial markets prefer a clear message from the government on its economic priorities and strategies.
Since the spring, the Thatcher government has instead broadcast a cacophony.
Mr. Lawson carefully watched exchange rates and stood ready to increase U.K. interest rates when the pound slid too sharply against the dollar or the mark.
By contrast, Sir Alan was viewed as a "free-floater," or one who was inclined to let the currency markets set the level for the pound. 

Last summer, when the skirmishing became obvious, Smith Barney's Mr. Horne said that the antipathies were "adding confusion to an already murky situation" in which sterling was becoming an increasingly volatile currency. "I question the strategy of having an alternate economic adviser," he added. 

Mrs. Thatcher's ties with Sir Alan were cemented during her first term, when the straight-talking economist served for three years as a key adviser.
According to a former Downing Street aide, she would then say to him, "You get the economics right, and I'll get the politics right." 

Craig Forman and Richard E. Rustin contributed to this article. 

