.START 

Chemical Waste Management has turned into one of the market's best-performing stocks by advancing 76% in the past year.
Its reward: a swarm of short sellers. 

Short sellers are backwards investors: They borrow stock and sell it, hoping the price will go down.
Eventually the shorts must "cover" by purchasing shares to replace the borrowed ones.
But if a stock declines enough in the meantime, they profit. 

What with all the garbage-disposal problems clogging the headlines, it's easy to see why the shares of the nation's largest hazardous-waste concern have zoomed ahead to yesterday's close of a post-split 22 1/8.
But the stock now trades at a dizzying 32 times the latest 12-month earnings for the company, more than double the multiple of the market as a whole. 

That handsome multiple, a badge of success, is also a red flag for the shorts, who like to bet that a stock can't stay hot forever.
Between Sept. 15 and Oct. 13, the New York Stock Exchange says, the total number of Chemical Waste Management shares sold short leaped to 5.3 million from 1.9 million -- the largest increase for any stock on the Big Board. 

The company says it hasn't any idea who is doing the shorting or why.
A spokesman said he can't comment further because a stock offering is in progress.
The offering will increase the public's stake to 23% and decrease that of the parent company, Waste Management, to 77% from 81%. 

Money managers and analysts generally agree that the stock has had a huge run and is now expensive.
Some go further and say that owning it could be . . . well, hazardous. 

"We love the company, we expect to be owners again, but we think for the moment it's at least adequately priced," says Gerald Levine, a partner at Weiss, Peck & Greer.
The firm sold much of its Chemical Waste holding earlier this year, government filings show. 

Mr. Levine says he can understand short sellers' motivation. "When they see a stock extend on the end of a long up move, that is often a sign the stock is going to roll over," he says. 

Alliance Capital Management, a unit of Equitable Life Assurance Society, has sold at least 927,000 shares this year.
It won't comment on the sales. 

Kenneth Hackel, a money manager who runs Cash Flow Investors in Fort Lee, N.J., says Chemical Waste is "not my cup of tea." It sells for 38 times operating cash flow, he says, while the typical industrial company sells for only 7.7 times that yardstick. 

Pricey though it may be, Chemical Waste still is a risky short-sale candidate.
It has a superb record of earnings growth and a strong balance sheet.
Citing those attributes, several well-known short sellers say they aren't the ones doing the shorting. 

Shorting because of a high stock price alone is "a recipe for death," said Julian Robertson of Tiger Management in New York. 

Chemical Waste Management is "not our kind of short," said Joe Feshbach, one of the three brothers who run Feshbach Brothers, generally considered the nation's largest short-selling firm.
The company, he said, is too well-capitalized to "go away." 

But Mr. Feshbach thinks other hazardous-waste companies' stocks "could be a fruitful area {for shorting} because a number of companies have reported disappointing earnings" recently.
He said his firm has shorted the shares of one small company, which he wouldn't name. 

Analysts say hazardous-waste companies that have posted disappointing earnings include Canonie Environmental Services, Environmental Systems, Groundwater Technology, Gundle Environmental Systems and Rollins Environmental Services. 

But Chemical Waste's earnings for the third quarter were "sparkling," says Kay Hahn, an analyst with Chicago Corp.
She recommends the stock, and says short sellers are "taking their life in their hands." 

Also bullish is Remy Fisher, a vice president with J.W. Seligman & Co., a New York money-management firm that has been increasing its Chemical Waste shareholdings. "It doesn't seem like anything could tarnish {Chemical Waste's} growth prospects," she says.
She points out that Chemical Waste has about 40% of the hazardous-waste industry's revenue, and that it's hard for new firms to enter the field because of government regulations and neighborhood opposition to hazardous-waste treatment plants. 

Nevertheless, some analysts expect Chemical Waste's torrid growth to slow a bit.
Earnings for 1989 will be up about 30%, says Deborah Thielsch of First Boston, compared with 34% growth in 1988.
For 1990, she expects a 25% gain.
That's still enviable growth, but Ms. Thielsch is neutral on the stock, citing its "incredibly high" price-earnings ratio. 

Chemical Waste Management (NYSE; Symbol: CHW) 

Business: Hazardous waste management 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Revenue: $700.2 million 

Net income: $116.9 million; or 58 cents a share 

Third quarter, Sept. 30, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 20 cents vs. 17 cents 

Average daily trading volume: 287,209 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 200.6 million 

Note: Figures adjusted to reflect 2-for-1 stock split paid in October 1989. 

