.START 

Bolar Pharmaceutical Co., under pressure from the Food and Drug Administration, agreed to recall its generic version of the antibiotic drug Macrodantin from retail shelves, according to FDA officials. 

It was another setback for Bolar, the flagship of the generic drug industry.
Earlier this month, Bolar began recalling its nitrofurantoin macrocrystalline capsules from wholesalers and distributors because of FDA evidence suggesting that the company passed off Macrodantin as its own to obtain FDA approval to market its generic product.
At that time, however, the company balked at a retail recall, arguing that the evidence wasn't sufficient to justify such a move. 

But on Oct. 25, the FDA offered additional evidence to buttress its case that the brand-name drug had been substituted for Bolar's product in pre-market testing, FDA officials said yesterday.
The agency now has evidence that Bolar submitted Macrodantin as its generic version for testing not only at PharmaKinetics Laboratories Inc., Baltimore, but also at an independent laboratory in Canada. 

FDA investigators obtained a sample of the Bolar drug from the Canadian lab, according to FDA official Michael Shaffer. "It turned out to be the brand-name product," he said. 

In Copiague, N.Y., Robert Shulman, president of Bolar, and sales director Karen Sattig couldn't be reached for comment. 

The inspector general's office of the Health and Human Services Department already is conducting a criminal investigation of whether Bolar filed "false information" with the FDA in seeking clearance to market at least two generic drugs. 

Meanwhile, the FDA is moving to withdraw its approval of Bolar's nitrofurantoin macrocrystalline capsules, which are used primarily to treat urinary-tract infections.
The brand-name drug is manufactured by Norwich Eaton, a subsidiary of Cincinnati-based Procter & Gamble Co. 

Although no health problems are known to have been caused by Bolar's product, the FDA officials said the agency can no longer ensure that it is the equivalent of Macrodantin. 

In American Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Bolar closed at $14.375, down 50 cents. 

