.START 

Prince, the rock star, is indecent, according to the Federal Communications Comission.
At least before 8 p.m. 

The FCC proposed to fine KLUC-FM, in Las Vegas, $2,000 for playing the Prince song "Erotic City" on May 16, 1988, at 7:53 p.m. because the song is allegedly indecent.
By FCC standards, that means the song uses "patently offensive" terms to describe "sexual or excretory activities or organs." 

"Erotic City," which was released as a single in 1984 and sold 250,000 copies, is certainly hot -- too hot for this newspaper to reproduce the lyrics.
Suffice it to say, the song uses a short word for sexual congress, and congress is in session a lot during the song. 

An agent for Prince didn't return a telephone call seeking comment.
And KLUC, a part of Nationwide Communications Inc., couldn't be reached.
The Las Vegas telephone directory only lists KLUC's "Concert Hot Line" -- and no one answered the Hot Line at midday yesterday. 

But the proposed fine is bound to be controversial.
For one thing, the FCC dismissed 51 complaints about indecency because the programs aired material after 8 p.m. -- only seven minutes after KLUC played "Erotic City." The FCC now says 8 p.m. is the time that is all right to begin airing indecent material because children aren't likely listening in great numbers.
Earlier, the agency set the decency line at midnight, but an appeals court rejected that time as too restrictive. 

"You have to draw some lines," said Robert Pettit, the FCC's general counsel. 

Tom Chiusano, vice president and general manager of WXRK-FM in New York, said the FCC decision singling out KLUC seemed unfair because he estimated probably 500 radio stations have played "Erotic City." But Mr. Chiusano has his own problems.
The FCC also sent WXRK a letter saying it believed one of its shows, the Howard Stern Show, contained indecent material. 

The agency hasn't yet proposed a fine for WXRK.
But two years ago, when the agency began its crackdown on indecency, Mr. Stern's show, which features a lot of gross jokes, was one of the shows cited in the agency's first warning letters to broadcasters. "Howard Stern doesn't broadcast indecent material," said Mr. Chiusano. "He does four hours of contemporaneous humor." 

So far the indecency crackdown has managed to offend both civil libertarians, who say the FCC has gone too far, and Congress, which says the FCC hasn't gone far enough.
Meanwhile the courts have rejected most of the FCC's plans, and the agency has been subject to constant ridicule.
One commissioner even proposed banning a reading of James Joyce's "Ulysses" until cooler heads prevailed. 

But the agency hasn't given up.
In addition to citing the stations in New York and Las Vegas, the FCC proposed fining radio stations in Miami and Los Angeles for airing allegedly indecent material before 8 p.m.
In addition, the agency said it would begin a proceeding to see whether it was possible to find legal grounds for a ban on indecent programming around the clock. 

