.START 

For a company that sells billions of dollars in military hardware each year, Northrop Corp. is pressing awfully hard to get back a mere $6,250,000. 

The missing funds -- and the way they've been accounted for -- are at the center of a long-running dispute between the Los Angeles aerospace company and a well-connected Korean enterprise called Asia Culture Travel Development Co. 

Since news of Northrop's Korean dealings became public last year, the company has insisted that it sunk the money into a proposed hotel venture in Seoul, losing everything when it was bamboozled by Korean con men.
The Koreans say that the hotel was a ruse from the beginning, and Northrop really intended to bribe government officials to buy its ill-fated F-20 Tigershark jet fighter. 

Now, a document released by the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee alleges that Northrop tried to cover up those purportedly illicit payments by forging signatures, shuffling millions of dollars in and out of banks and even paying hush money to middlemen who threatened to disclose the scam to the authorities. 

Some of the allegations were given to the subcommittee during testimony in August 1988.
But the document -- featuring a passel of new details -- is sure to revive interest in the matter on Capitol Hill, where lawmakers this week are deciding on appropriations for Northrop's most important Pentagon program, the B-2 Stealth bomber.
Asia Culture Travel submitted the document as part of its legal defense to the International Chamber of Commerce, which is arbitrating the case between Asia Culture Travel and Northrop. 

One subcommittee investigator, who works for Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.), called the information "a major step forward" in its own inquiry.
A federal grand jury also is actively trying to determine whether Northrop violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. 

Northrop has strongly denied any illegalities.
It said that in August it made an extensive filing to the chamber that rebuts, point by point, the allegations by Asia Culture Travel.
A copy wasn't immediately available. 

In a May 8 filing to the chamber, though, Northrop stressed its view that "this is not a complex case . . . but is instead a straightforward breach-of-contract dispute." The company added that Asia Culture Travel's "allegations are so contradictory and inconsistent that they provide powerful evidence" that the Koreans "deceived Northrop" by pitching the hotel project. 

But Asia Culture Travel lays out a much different story in its 52-page brief.
Northrop's first contact with the Koreans, this version of the tangled events goes, occurred in the summer of 1983 when Northrop approached Dong Yang Express Co., a bus company that was run by Lee MinHa.
His brother-in-law was the late Park Chong Kyu, a powerful businessman. 

Mr. Park, the pistol-packing owner of a notorious Seoul night spot called the Safari Club, was a member of the Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee with easy access to the highest echelons of the Korean government. 

The brief alleges that Northrop, by way of a Honolulu-based consultant named James Shin, proposed the idea of selling to Korea as many as 200 F-20s through Dong Yang Express, which was to receive a 2% commission with a $55 million cap.
As part of the arrangement, the document contends, Northrop was asked to invest in the Sofitel Seoul, "a high-class hotel" that was to be built on the site of a Dong Yang Express garage. 

Though it is typical for American companies to invest in foreign countries in which they want to trade arms, thereby offsetting the cost of currency conversion on its contracts to the overseas government, it was still initially puzzling why Northrop approached a bus company to do it. 

"I first thought it made no sense to offer to an express bus company the distribution of up-to-date fighters," Mr. Lee told public prosecutors in Seoul who have also investigated the situation, according to the document. "But later I learned that it was not Dong Yang Express but Mr. Park Chong Kyu that Northrop aimed to contact." 

In May 1984, the document asserts, Northrop officials met with Mr. Park -- known best to Americans as C.K. Park -- and allegedly asked him to "perform promotional activities" for the F-20.
The brief says Mr. Park then asked for $5 million up front, adding that "he could procure such expenses from the budget for the Sofitel Hotel project if approved by Northrop." 

But Northrop declined, the brief says, when its representatives pointed out that a payoff would be illegal and "such a payment, if done, would constitute a scandal." Yet the document alleges that it didn't take long before Northrop and Mr. Park devised a new scheme to funnel the money.
The conduit, the filing insists, was to be another hotel project -- this time a joint venture with Asia Culture Travel, another Park-affiliated concern. 

Promotional materials touting Asia Culture Travel were delivered to Northrop and appear to have been signed by Kang Oh-Hyun, an official of the firm; in fact, the filing alleges, they were forged by Mr. Shin, the Northrop consultant.
The brief says other procedural forms relating to the joint venture appear to have been signed by four Asia Culture Travel shareholders when Mr. Park came to Los Angeles in the summer of 1984 for the Olympic Games.
But three of the holders, the filing says, weren't in California at the time. 

On Aug. 9, 1984, Northrop told Mr. Park that $6,250,000 had been deposited to an account in Hong Kong that he controlled.
Everything, the arbitration filing suggests, seemed set. 

That is, at least until October when, during a test flight, an F-20 crashed.
The pilot was killed and the aircraft destroyed.
Shortly thereafter another F-20 crashed in Canada during a demonstration, and Northrop eventually gave up on the F-20 program after out-of-pocket expenditures of more than $1 billion.
Mr. Park died of cancer in 1985. 

Meanwhile, Northrop's own board began inquiring about what happened to the hotel -- the Seoul Palace, it was to be called -- and the $6,250,000.
It was at that point, the filing alleges, that a cover-up began. 

First, the brief says, Northrop wanted to formally cancel with Dong Yang Express the earlier Sofitel Hotel transaction that had been proposed.
The idea, the filing alleges, was to be able to transfer to Dong Yang Express $3.5 million in termination fees.
Donald Foulds, a Northrop executive, even allegedly drafted the settlement claim for Dong Yang Express. 

Mr. Foulds's attorney, Jan Handzlik, said his client "denies that he engaged in any improper activity in respect to the Korean hotel project, including any cover-up activities." 

That money, investigators for the House subcommittee said, was in turn designed to be handed back to Northrop to help it account for more than half of the missing $6,250,000.
Of the remainder, the filing maintains, $1,750,000 could be chalked up to expenses and $1 million was available through a Park bank account. 

But, the filing says, that plan had to be killed when "the blackmailers appear." The first allegedly was a Dong Yang Express middleman, who told James Dorsey, a Honolulu-based Northrop marketing executive, that he would "publish all the facts concerning Northrop's efforts to sell the F-20 to the Korean government," the document says.
Both Mr. Dorsey and his lawyer, Daniel Bookin, declined to comment. 

Welko Gasich, then a top Northrop executive, allegedly handed over $1.5 million to Dong Yang Express, which passed on $500,000 to silence the middleman, the document claims.
Mr. Gasich declined to comment; the middleman couldn't be located. 

In early 1987, the arbitration filing asserts, Mr. Shin, the Northrop consultant, demanded $2 million to remain silent.
Mr. Shin, who is being sued by Northrop in federal court in Honolulu, couldn't be reached. 

It was then that Northrop filed suit against the Koreans -- in what the House investigators claim was an attempt to make it look as if Northrop had been swindled. 

The company is asking the International Chamber of Commerce to order Asia Culture Travel and its associates to return the $6,250,000, plus interest "at the highest lawful rate." 

