.START 

McDonnell Douglas Corp. reported a 54% drop in third-quarter net income, but its Douglas Aircraft Co. subsidiary appears to be fixing some of its problems. 

Douglas Aircraft completed a restructuring in the third quarter but clearly is still adjusting to the jolt.
The subsidiary posted a $3 million loss for the quarter, but that was after a one-time pretax gain of $25 million stemming from an insurance payment. 

"They lost $28 million, but that is good news," said Jack Modzelewski, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst, who had expected Douglas's loss to be as much as $50 million.
In the second quarter, the subsidiary had a $158 million loss. 

At least, Mr. Modzelewski said, "it's losing money at a decelerating rate." 

Indeed, while investors weren't exactly gleeful, McDonnell Douglas held steady on the New York Stock Exchange, closing yesterday at $67.125 a share, unchanged. 

McDonnell Douglas posted third-quarter net of $38 million, or 98 cents a share, down from $83 million, or $2.18 a share, a year earlier.
The latest results include an extraordinary gain of $6 million, or 14 cents a share, from the divestiture of the bulk of the company's information systems group.
In the year-earlier period, the company had a $4 million loss from discontinued operations. 

Sales for the St. Louis-based aircraft and defense company rose 1.1% to $3.72 billion from $3.68 billion. 

Besides the troubles at Douglas -- which continued to be plagued by high development costs on the new MD-11 tri-jet and parts shortages -- McDonnell Douglas's combat aircraft segment also had its difficulties.
Profits for the division tumbled to $67 million from $91 million, primarily because of reduced earnings for its AH-64 Apache helicopter and write-downs on several other helicopter programs.
These more than offset an improved financial performance by the F-15 fighter.
Earnings were also off 33% in the missiles, space and electronic-systems segment, despite a 13% rise in revenue.
Mr. Modzelewski, while noting that times are tough for arms makers, said he expected McDonnell Douglas's Pentagon-related projects to "bounce back next quarter" to some degree.
A number of defense-oriented aerospace companies, including Northrop Corp. and General Dynamics Corp., have reported either flat or lower third-quarter earnings. 

But the biggest question mark remains Douglas.
Deliveries of its MD-80 jetliner, which competes primarily with Boeing Co. 's 737 series, jumped to 30 in the third quarter, from 24 in the second period and 28 a year earlier.
Losses on the program narrowed to $1 million in the latest quarter from $34 million in the second period. 

Company officials boast that Douglas could account for half of McDonnell Douglas revenues by 1992, compared with about a third now.
Besides the MD-80 and MD-11 commercial jetliners, Douglas is building the T-45 Navy trainer and C-17 military transport. 

But whether things at the Long Beach, Calif., subsidiary can really be turned around has yet to be seen. "Douglas is improving," said Judith Comeau, analyst at Goldman Sachs & Co., "but they're no where near where they need to be." 

