.START 

The University of Toronto said it will drop its objections to the offer by Institut Merieux S.A. to acquire Connaught BioSciences Inc. for 942 million Canadian dollars (US$803.7 million) after reaching a research agreement with the French vaccine manufacturer. 

Under the terms of the accord, similar to an agreement reached last week between the university and Merieux's rival bidders for Connaught, Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Chiron Corp., Merieux agreed to spend 15 million Canadian dollars (US$12.8 million) to fund vaccine-related research in Canada, C$9 million of which would go to the university's research programs. 

The university had sued Connaught, arguing its directors had broken a 1972 agreement not to sell the company to a foreign concern by recommending Merieux's offer to shareholders.
A decision in the case, heard last week by the Ontario Supreme Court, is expected this week.
A decision in the university's favor could block Connaught's directors from recommending Merieux's offer to shareholders, but couldn't block the company's sale. 

James Keffer, vice president, research, at the university, said the university isn't favoring one bid over another. 

"Both of these agreements are good, both add substantial benefits to Canada," he said. "Ciba-Geigy {and Chiron} are offering slightly more investment dollars Õto Canadian universitieså and some new products, but Merieux is proposing to build a new biotechnology center." 

Ciba-Geigy, a Swiss pharmaceutical company, and California-based Chiron, a pharmaceutical research concern, are offering C$866 million, or C$30 a share, for Connaught. 

The Canadian government said earlier this month that the proposed Merieux acquisition didn't appear to offer enough "net benefit" to Canada to approve. 

"Reaching an agreement is an advantage to both the university and Merieux, both in terms of business and politically, since the university has been quite vocal about the issue of foreign ownership," said Philippe Stoeckel, president of Merieux Institute Inc., Merieux's U.S. subsidiary. 

