.START 

Private-sector union contracts signed in the third quarter granted slightly lower wage increases than those signed in the second quarter, but wage increases still are running above last year's levels. 

The Labor Department said wage settlements in the third quarter called for average annual wage increases of 3.6% in the first year and 3.0% over the life of the contracts. 

The last time parties to these settlements negotiated wage increases, mostly in 1986 or 1987, wages increased an average of 2.4% a year over the life of the contracts. 

If this pattern continues, the Labor Department said, 1989 will be the first year that the measure has shown an increase since 1981 when the department started comparing expiring contracts with those that replaced them. 

This reflects the restoration of wage cuts in the steel and other industries as well as higher wages granted nurses who work in health-care facilities. 

Settlements reached in the first nine months of 1989 called for wage increases averaging 3.7% in the first contract year and 3.1% annually over the life of the contracts, the department said.
For all of 1988, union contracts provided for 2.5% wage increases in the first year and 2.4% over the life of the contracts. 

In the second quarter, contracts called for increases of 3.9% in the first year and 3.4% over the life of the contracts. 

The figures exclude lump-sum payments and cost-of-living adjustments, so the actual wage increases may have been bigger.
About 35% of the workers covered by contracts signed in the first nine months of year get lump-sum payments; about 15% are covered by cost-of-living clauses.
Unions covered by one or other provisions generally settled for lower percentage wage increases. 

The Labor Department said wage increases in manufacturing industries continue to be smaller than those in other industries.
For all six million workers under major collective bargaining agreements, regardless of when they were signed, wage increases in the first nine months of 1989 averaged 2.5% -- including cost-of-living adjustments. 

