.START 

Quantum Chemical Corp. suspended its cash dividend until at least April, saying it would pay stock dividends instead. 

The move came as the company, hurt by falling plastics prices and two fires at an important plant, reported a third-quarter loss of $21.4 million, or 86 cents a share. 

In the year-earlier quarter, the New York-based maker of commodity plastics reported earnings from continuing operations of $94.7 million, or $3.72 a share.
Profits from discontinued operations made year-ago net $99.8 million, or $3.92 a share. 

As partial compensation to its shareholders, who received a special $50-a-share cash dividend earlier this year, Quantum declared a 1% stock dividend payable Dec. 1 to stock of record Nov. 10. 

The company said it suspended the cash dividend because of a covenant with some of its bondholders that limits payouts to 50% of retained operating profit from Jan. 1, 1989.
For the nine months, the company has already paid $2.25 a share of dividends on operating earnings of $3.87 a share. 

While an exception could have been made, the company said, it would only have postponed the suspension. "Why not bite the bullet?" said a spokesman for the company. 

As previously reported, Quantum has been hurt by a drop of 20% to 30% in prices for polyethylene, a basic ingredient used to make such products as garbage bags, milk jugs, meat packaging and toys. 

Sales from continuing operations fell sharply to $557.7 million from $724.4 million in the year-earlier quarter.
For the nine months, sales fell slightly to $2.04 billion from $2.11 billion. 

Although Quantum has captured about a 20% share of the U.S. polyethylene market, it is more vulnerable to price swings than some of its bigger rivals, including Dow Chemical Co. and Union Carbide Corp., which have much broader business bases. 

In addition, two devastating fires at Quantum's chemical complex in Morris, Ill., caused an estimated loss of $22 million, or 89 cents a share, in the third quarter.
The plant, which filled about 25% of the company's ethylene needs and represented about 25% of its polyethylene capacity, won't be back on line until early 1991.
Until then, secondary plants that depend on products made at Morris will operate at reduced capacity. 

A further hit came from expenses connected with Quantum's joint acquisition in August of Petrolane Inc., a propane distributor.
Nonrecurring charges from the bridge loan and other purchase expenses cost the company $17.9 million, or 79 cents a share, for the quarter. 

Moreover, Quantum is still in the midst of a three-year plant expansion program valued at about $1.3 billion that will continue to put pressure on its cash flow and earnings. 

Despite the hammering, Quantum said it may restore the cash dividend at its April 26 board meeting.
If not, the company says it will pay 2% stock dividends on a semiannual basis until its cash situation improves. 

Investors seemed ambivalent about Quantum's prospects.
Several brokerage firms issued buy recommendations on the stock yesterday.
In active trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Quantum's shares closed at $33.25, down $1.50. 

