.START 

Black & Decker Corp. said it agreed to sell its Bostik chemical adhesives unit to Orkem S.A., a French chemical company, for $345 million. 

Bostik is the first Emhart Corp. unit to be sold as part of the power-tool manufacturer's effort to reduce debt and consolidate operations after it acquired Emhart earlier this year. 

Black & Decker said it plans to put other Emhart units on the block in the future, with the goal of raising $1 billion in net proceeds. 

Black & Decker rescued Emhart from the takeover bid of Topper Limited Partnership last March by agreeing to acquire the maker of door locks and gardening tools for about $2.8 billion. 

The move significantly expanded Black & Decker's product line, but also significantly increased its debt load.
The acquisition boosted Black & Decker's ratio of debt to total capital to more than 80%.
Company officials have said they plan to reduce that ratio to less than 50% over the next 2 1/2 years. 

Earlier this year, Black & Decker put three Emhart businesses on the auction block: the information and electronics segment, the Dynapert electrical assembly business and Mallory Capacitors.
The three units had combined 1988 sales of about $904 million.
The three units contributed about a third of Emhart's total sales. 

In addition, Black & Decker had said it would sell two other undisclosed Emhart operations if it received the right price.
Bostic is one of the previously unnamed units, and the first of the five to be sold. 

The company is still negotiating the sales of the other four units and expects to announce agreements by the end of the year.
The five units generated sales of about $1.3 billion in 1988, almost half of Emhart's $2.3 billion revenue.
Bostic posted 1988 sales of $255 million. 

"Our divestiture program is on schedule, and we remain confident that we will achieve our stated goal of over $1 billion in net proceeds," said Nolan D. Archibald, Black & Decker's president and chief executive officer, in a statement. 

The sales are an attempt to quell investor concern about Black & Decker's increased debt burden from the Emhart purchase.
The company's stock plunged when it first announced that it planned to acquire Emhart. 

The company maintains that it doesn't expect Emhart to contribute to earnings for about another 12 months. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Black & Decker closed at $19.75 yesterday, down 25 cents.
The company didn't announce the sale until after the close of the market. 

