.START 

THE U.S. ECONOMY GREW at a moderate 2.5% annual rate in the third quarter despite the worst trade performance in six years.
The expansion, matching the second quarter's pace, was fueled by strong consumer spending, especially for autos.
But analysts expect GNP growth to slow in the current quarter.
An inflation gauge slowed to a 2.9% growth rate from 5% the previous quarter. 

The Big Three car makers all posted quarterly losses in core North American auto operations for the first time since 1982.
Expectations of slow sales and price wars are dimming the outlook for the current quarter. 

GM is seeking to buy up to 15% of Jaguar, marking its first salvo in a looming battle with Ford for control of the British luxury car maker. 

Stock prices tumbled amid growing concern about corporate earnings.
The Dow Jones industrials closed off 39.55 points, at 2613.73.
Most bonds eased, but long-term Treasury issues edged up.
The dollar also gained, especially against the British pound. 

PaineWebber Group ordered a major pullback from program trading amid mounting debate about the practice at Wall Street firms. 

AT&T was allowed by the FCC to continue offering discount phone services to big-business clients.
The agency also plans to review its regulation of the long-distance market. 

A capital-gains tax cut has stalled in the Senate.
Democratic leaders have bottled up the plan and may be able to prevent a vote indefinitely. 

Treasury Secretary Brady said the SEC should be given the authority to close the stock markets in a crisis.
Earlier, SEC Chairman Breeden said he doesn't want such power because it could end up disrupting the markets. 

Regional thrift regulators claimed that phone calls were bugged during the examination of Lincoln S&L and that federal officials delayed Lincoln's seizure until it had become the costliest thrift failure ever. 

Federal Express pilots voted against joining a union, a major victory for Chairman Frederick Smith. 

Intel's most powerful chip has flaws that could delay several computer makers' marketing efforts.
But the bugs aren't expected to hurt Intel and most computer manufacturers. 

Bethlehem Steel agreed to form a joint venture with the world's second-biggest steelmaker, Usinor-Sacilor of France, to modernize part of Bethlehem's ailing BethForge division. 

The Treasury will hold an unscheduled auction of securities next week to raise $17 billion.
The unusual move is intended to buy time for Congress to debate a debt-limit increase. 

Private-sector union contracts signed in the third quarter granted an average annual wage increase of 3%, slightly below the second-quarter rise but still above year-ago levels. 

Quantum Chemical suspended its cash dividend in favor of a stock payout.
It also posted a quarterly loss. 

Navigation Mixte rejected as too low a $1.77 billion bid by Paribas, which is seeking to boost its stake in the French conglomerate to 66.7%. 

France's Banque Indosuez surprised London markets by moving to become the dominant shareholder in merchant bank Morgan Grenfell. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 175,240,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2613.73, off 39.55; transportation 1205.19, up 5.87; utilities 215.67, off 0.82. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3425.60, off 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 129.22, off 0.26; spot index 131.04, up 0.31. 

Dollar: 142.10 yen, up 0.58; 1.8400 marks, up 0.0047. 

