.START 

There are two versions of "Measure for Measure" on stage at the Alley Theater here.
One is a strong, vigorous portrayal of Shakespeare's play; the other is director Gregory Boyd's overlay of present-day punk rock decadence on old Vienna. 

"Measure for Measure" is one of Shakespeare's "problem" plays, so named because it does not fit neatly into a category such as tragedy, comedy or history.
Its ambiguity and uneasy mixture of the serious and the comic is no doubt one reason why it is very much in vogue with directors just now. 

Last season, Hartford Stage director Mark Lamos mounted a production at Lincoln Center, and currently two other productions -- one just closed at the Old Globe in San Diego and another now at the Seattle Rep -- overlap with Mr. Boyd's. 

In the play, the Duke of Vienna despairs over the licentiousness of his subjects and turns over the rule of the city to the puritanical Angelo, hoping he can set things right.
When Angelo hears that the young man Claudio has made his fiancee pregnant before he could marry her, Angelo summarily condemns Claudio to death. 

When, however, Claudio's sister, Isabella, a novitiate in a convent, goes to Angelo to plead her brother's case, the obdurate ruler immediately falls in love with her and, in a supreme act of hypocrisy, demands that Isabella yield up her virtue to him in exchange for her brother's life. 

Meanwhile, the Duke, who set the original scheme in motion, appears on the scene disguised as a friar and becomes involved in a series of intrigues that has everyone fearing the worst possible outcome until the Duke arranges a last minute reprieve for all concerned. 

For the Alley production, scene designer Peter David Gould has arranged a stark but extremely effective set featuring a rectangular platform of white-washed boards that extends into the audience.
When the action requires, a prison cell, consisting of an enlarged wire cage, rolls forward on iron wheels on the platform. 

In the play's major scenes Mr. Boyd demonstrates that he has a firm grasp of the Shakespearean dynamic.
When Isabella (Ellen Lauren) confronts her brother Claudio (Matt Loney) in his cell, explaining the price she has been asked to secure his freedom; when Isabella and the disguised Duke (Philip Kerr) conspire to trick Angelo; and when Mariana (Annalee Jefferies), a woman wronged by Angelo, confronts him with his past misdeeds, the performers bring the dramatic high points to life with intense energy and intelligence. 

At such moments Mr. Boyd makes it clear that he has the capacity to be a superior interpreter of Shakespeare. 

When, however, he decides to be modern, or more accurately, when he decides to be trendy, the results are far less satisfactory.
Mr. Boyd is of the directorial school that believes one must find modern parallels or metaphors to make Shakespeare accessible to today's audiences.
It's a valid approach, but it puts a heavy burden on the director to show an uncommon degree of imagination and taste. 

In his "Measure," Mr. Boyd has "modernized" the pimps and prostitutes of Vienna whom Angelo is supposed to bring under control by converting them into transvestites, punk rockers and heavy metal types, with a strong emphasis on leather, chains and porno-inspired costumes.
Loud rock music accompanies all the scene changes, even those in the convent. 

When Claudio is arrested, he is brought on stage nude except for the manacles on his wrists and ankles.
When the opportunist Lucio (Jack Stehlin) visits the convent to inform Isabella of her brother's fate, Lucio not only slaps the mother superior on her rear, but brings along a voluptuous companion (Jill Powell), not in Shakespeare's script, to undulate lasciviously. 

Meanwhile, the pimp Pompey (Glen Allen Pruett), dressed in black leather and a prominent codpiece, indulges in enough obscene gestures and pelvic thrusts to launch a space probe. 

The problem here is not in the concept but in its lack of discrimination.
The inclusion at one point, for example, of a list of glitzy modern-day malefactors, ranging from Jim Bakker and Leona Helmsley to Zsa Zsa Gabor, is a bid for a cheap laugh unworthy of Mr. Boyd's ability. 

Despite the excesses, however, the scorecard for the production has many more pluses than minuses.
What's more, it represents an important step for the Alley Theater. "Measure for Measure" is Mr. Boyd's first directorial assignment as the theater's new artistic director. 

He succeeded Pat Brown, who was fired by the Alley board 18 months ago.
Her dismissal angered many in the regional theater establishment and led Peter Zeisler, head of Theatre Communications Group, to write an editorial in American Theatre magazine condemning the board.
None of this backlash could change the fact that Ms. Brown's regime was remarkably undistinguished and unimaginative. 

Now the Alley has moved ahead on both artistic and financial fronts.
Not only is Mr. Boyd giving the theater a new sense of adventure and excitement on stage, the balance sheet is the best the theater has had in 10 years.
As opposed to the $1.4 million deficit of the 1987-88 season, the 1988-89 year concluded with a $200,000 surplus and a $500,000 cash reserve. 

Admittedly last season's runaway hit, "Steel Magnolias," helped a lot, but so did cost cutting and other measures insisted on by the board.
Only time will tell if Mr. Boyd can restore to the Alley the acclaim it received when its founder, Nina Vance, was at the height of her powers.
But it is clear he is going to give it a shot. 

