.START 

In a highly unusual move that buys time for Congress to debate a debt-limit increase, the Treasury Department announced it will hold an unscheduled auction of securities next week to raise $17 billion. 

The auction is expected to be held on Monday and will settle on Tuesday, just hours before the current debt-limit legislation expires.
If Congress hasn't enacted a new debt limit by midnight Tuesday, the Treasury will have to suspend all sales of securities, including savings bonds. 

The extraordinary auction, however, should give the Treasury enough cash to cover Social Security checks due out Nov. 3.
In a letter to congressional leaders, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady said the government will now be able to operate through Nov. 8 without a debt-limit increase. 

The Treasury's action comes in response to a continuing stalemate on Capitol Hill over the debt-limit legislation.
Democrats want to use the debt-limit bill as a vehicle for enacting unrelated legislation that the administration opposes, and the administration is considering using the bill as a vehicle for a cut in the capital-gains tax. 

In recent days, the battle has become a game of chicken, and it had raised the prospect that the government might run out of cash next Friday and be unable to mail Social Security checks. 

Treasury officials said they decided to take their extraordinary action to make certain that Social Security recipients get their checks.
They also said the administration may still seek to attach a capital-gains tax cut to the debt legislation despite the intensifying controversy. "The secretary believes capital gains is a top priority and that any available vehicle ought to be used," said Assistant Treasury Secretary Roger Bolton. 

Existing debt-limit legislation allows the Treasury to borrow as much as $2.87 trillion.
But so far, the government's debt totals only $2.853 trillion.
That means the government can legally sell another $17 billion in debt, provided it acts by Tuesday. 

On Tuesday, the debt limit expires, and the limit drops back to $2.8 trillion.
If that occurs, no new securities can be issued without violating the debt-limit law.
The Treasury's regular auction of Treasury bills, scheduled to settle on Thursday, is expected to be canceled.
In addition, all sales of savings bonds and special securities issued to state and local governments will cease. 

The details of next week's unusual auction will be announced today. 

In his letter to congressional leaders, Treasury Secretary Brady called the move an "extraordinary administrative action." He said that it "is important Congress act on debt-limit legislation no later than Nov. 7, in order to ensure adequate time to arrange market borrowings to avoid default." 

Mr. Brady also said that he is "aware of no other realistic measures, other than debt-limit legislation, that could further extend the anticipated date of default." 

The debt-limit debate has become an annual ritual between the administration and Congress.
Increasing the limit is necessary to keep the U.S. from defaulting on its obligations, but the increase always creates intense controversy in Congress.
Legislators like to amend the debt-limit bill with extraneous legislation because they believe it's a difficult bill for the president to veto. 

This year, the debt-limit debate promises to be particularly intense because of the battle over capital gains.
The administration and its Republican allies see the measure as a possible opportunity to pass a capital-gains tax cut.
Their hope is that Democratic leaders in the Senate wouldn't block it for fear of being blamed for the government's default. 

