.START 

Some gifts are better left unopened. 

In 1984, Howard Conant, a director of Valspar Corp., donated to Goodwill Industries Inc. of Chicago an eight-acre site on the city's west side, where Valspar had operated a paint factory.
Goodwill planned to sell the property and pocket the proceeds, as it had in many similar cases. 

Six months later, Goodwill says, it was stunned to learn from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency that Mr. Conant's gift was contaminated and that the charity, as the current owner, could be held responsible for any cleanup costs.
Only this June, after the state agency made a more complete survey of the site, did Goodwill realize the extent of the problem: The property contains more than 70 storage tanks holding hazardous oily solvents and lead, and the soil is contaminated by similar substances. 

"It's a toxic time bomb," says James D. Wadsworth, president of the Chicago Goodwill, which is independent of sister Goodwills around the country.
Cleaning up the site is expected to cost many millions of dollars.
Paying even a portion of the cleanup costs could bankrupt the charity, which has annual revenue of $6 million, says Russell B. Selman, Goodwill's lawyer.
In a pending lawsuit, the charity has asked a federal district court in Chicago to rescind its donation agreement with Valspar and Mr. Conant. 

Goodwill's problem looms as a potential threat to any charity that accepts property gifts in the new age of tough environmental laws.
Under federal and Illinois law, present and past owners of a contaminated site are among those who can be held liable for all cleanup costs, regardless of who caused the problem; regulators generally assign the costs. 

Donating contaminated property allows companies to share the costs of their environmental problems, says Laurence Molloy of Molloy Corp., an environmental management firm in New York.
It also allows businesses to stop paying taxes and insurance on land they no longer use and to take a tax deduction on the property, tax lawyers say. 

Nonprofit organizations might escape liability by showing that they didn't know a site was contaminated, but to succeed they must also show that they conducted an investigation before accepting the donation and that it didn't disclose the toxic-waste problem.
Such an investigation can cost as much as $50,000. 

Charities face a dilemma, because they can't reject gifts of property without significantly reducing their revenue.
Since 1984, non-cash donations, which include real estate, have accounted for 20% of corporate giving, according to the Conference Board, a New York trade group that tracks corporate giving.
In 1983, such donations represented only 11% of corporate giving. 

Still, because of the hazards, many nonprofit organizations are tightening their rules on such gifts.
Since June, the Salvation Army's Eastern division has refused real-estate donations unless the donor first conducts an environmental assessment of the property. "We tend to be very careful," says Carl Schoch, property secretary for the Eastern division. "We're aware an owner might want to get rid of" a hazardous site. 

At the Nature Conservancy, site inspections, which have been mandatory since the late '70s, "are now specifically geared to looking for hazardous-waste problems," says Michael Dennis, general counsel for the Rosalind, Va., group. 

So far the organization hasn't incurred any major liabilities.
Last year it went back to a donor eight years after accepting a gift when the conservancy learned of waste on the site.
The donor agreed to share the cleanup costs.
Now the group is considering hiring environmental specialists and engineers to work for it and investigate properties."All you need is one hazardous property, and you could have a multimillion-dollar liability on your hands," Mr. Dennis says. 

Universities also are proceeding with caution.
In 1987 the University of Minnesota spent $100,000 cleaning up toxic waste at a property donated by a local power utility.
The site had been contaminated by a company that leased the property and is now bankrupt.
Now all property transfers involving the university are scrutinized for potential hazards -- at a base cost of about $20,000 for preliminary research and soil samples -- and scuttled if environmental problems can't be resolved. 

Many nonprofit groups spurn some donations out of fear of potential problems.
The Council on the Environment of New York City, a governmental agency, refused a gift of a site to be used for a children's playground when the council learned an auto repair shop had been located there.
Little money was available for tests on the site, but "common sense said there could be problems," says Lys McLaughlin, the agency's executive director. 

Since receiving the Valspar gift, the Chicago Goodwill has virtually closed the door on property donations, says its president, Mr. Wadsworth.
But that's no help in its current toxic-waste mess.
In its suit, Goodwill claims that Valspar, a paint and varnish maker based in Minneapolis, and Mr. Conant haven't met terms of the donation agreement or environmental regulations about property transfers. 

Mr. Conant, however, isn't about to take back his gift.
His lawyer, Michael Quinn, says he doesn't want the land back because its value has declined since it was donated due to vandalism or poor maintenance.
Valspar, which had leased the property from Mr. Conant, says it has complied with all requests from the Illinois EPA about the site. "We have empathy for the unfortunate situation Goodwill is in, but that doesn't mean a legal obligation attaches to it," says Leo G. Stern, a lawyer for Valspar.
Both Valspar and Mr. Conant argue that Goodwill doesn't have standing to bring its suit. 

As the litigation progresses toward the pretrial fact-finding stage, Goodwill's bills continue to mount.
It has already spent more than $50,000 on security guards and fences at the site.
The charity also owes $400,000 in back taxes on the property; its tax-exempt status applies only if property is being used for charitable purposes. 

The state of Illinois has sued Goodwill for a share of the cleanup costs at a second site, a former paint factory in Chicago.
That property was donated to Goodwill by Artra Group Inc., a Northbrook, Ill., company with interests in fashion jewelry and accessories.
Goodwill later sold the site, before, it says, there was any indication of contamination. 

Some charity officials now say Congress should exempt nonprofit organizations that receive land donations from any cleanup liability.
That seems unlikely, though, because "everyone wants an exemption," says David Van Slyke, a lawyer with the enforcement and compliance division of the federal EPA. "But the agency is trying to be equitable.
We're not trying to jam people when they are an innocent party." For now, Goodwill's Mr. Wadsworth lectures other charities about accepting land donations. "It's supposed to be a gift," he says. "But it can turn out to be a liability." 

