.START 

Telerate Inc., which has rejected an $18-a-share tender offer by Dow Jones & Co. for the 33% of Telerate that Dow Jones doesn't already own, said the two companies began talks yesterday to try to negotiate a friendly transaction. 

However, the talks didn't produce any changes in the $576 million Dow Jones offer, which a committee of Telerate's two independent directors has rejected as inadequate. 

Peter Skinner, vice president and corporate general counsel for Dow Jones, said yesterday's talks took place both on the telephone and in person. "We discussed the bid, but Dow Jones and its board of directors believe the bid is full and fair," Mr. Skinner said.
He said no future talks are currently scheduled, but added that Dow Jones representatives will meet again with Telerate officials if Telerate seeks a meeting. 

Telerate disclosed the opening of negotiations in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which said that "there can be no assurance that such negotiations will continue or will result in revised terms that will be satisfactory to the special committee." 

The talks followed an effort by Telerate to place a strongly worded advertisement attacking the Dow Jones offer in yesterday's editions of The Wall Street Journal, according to two people familiar with Telerate. 

After Telerate submitted its ad to the Journal Wednesday, the people said, a lawyer for Dow Jones telephoned a Telerate lawyer.
Soon thereafter, Warren H. Phillips, chairman of Dow Jones, telephoned Neil S. Hirsch, chairman of Telerate.
As a result of the conversations, the people said, Telerate decided not to run the ad yesterday, and Dow Jones agreed to meet with Telerate. 

Mr. Skinner said that Dow Jones executives had been told that the ad would be submitted by Telerate and were advised of its content.
The Dow Jones executives indicated to Telerate executives that such an ad would not be "helpful," Mr. Skinner said, and Telerate decided not to run the ad. 

A spokesman for Telerate declined to elaborate on Telerate's filing with the SEC. 

Telerate stock rose 87.5 cents to close at $20.50 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
Dow Jones fell 62.5 cents to close at $36.625. 

Many of Wall Street's takeover-stock speculators bought relatively large positions in Telerate stock after Dow Jones announced its tender offer on Sept. 21.
The traders are betting Dow Jones will increase its $18-a-share offer in order to acquire full ownership of Telerate, an electronic distributor of financial-market information. 

Several takeover stock traders said yesterday they expect Dow Jones to offer at least $21.
Some analysts, investment bankers and institutional investors who have studied Telerate have said they believe the company could fetch between $25 and $30 a share if it were put up for auction. 

But the takeover stock traders, who declined to be identified, said they believe it is unrealistic to expect Dow Jones will pay that much, considering it already owns about 67% of Telerate. 

Bruce Thorp, an analyst at Philadelphia-based Provident National Bank, said Dow Jones's tender offer reflects a typical premium for the purchase of a remaining minority stake.
He thinks Dow Jones will end up paying $20 or $21 a share for Telerate. 

"The offer will be sweetened, not because it has to be, but because it will make for a smoother transaction," Mr. Thorp said. "Dow Jones could bludgeon its way through the process and get it for less, but they won't do that.
Dow Jones is not going to squeeze as hard as it could." 

Dow Jones declined to comment on Mr. Thorp's speculation. 

Telerate's proposed ad, headlined "What Now, Dow Jones?" was in the form of a letter to Dow Jones directors. "How can a company of Dow Jones's reputation persist in a coercive attempt to squeeze out the minority shareholders of Telerate at a low-ball price of $18 a share?" the ad asked.
A copy of the ad was obtained from a person familiar with Telerate. 

"We are forced to consider Dow Jones's actions as hostile -- to Telerate's shareholders, management, and employees," the ad said.
It was signed by Mr. Hirsch, three other Telerate directors who are employees of Telerate, and two outside directors. 

People familiar with Telerate said the ad was intended to encourage Dow Jones to begin negotiations and was submitted to the Journal for that reason. "We could have run it in the New York Times," one person familiar with Telerate said. 

As evidence of their contention that the current Dow Jones offer is too low, takeover-stock speculators pointed to an SEC filing by Dow Jones disclosing that Dow Jones managers had proposed offering $19 a share for Telerate.
However, that proposal was overruled by Dow Jones's board, which decided to offer $18 a share. 

After the Telerate special committee rejected the Dow Jones offer as inadequate, Mr. Phillips of Dow Jones said, "We are proceeding with our $18-a-share offer and continue to believe that the offer is fair to all Telerate stockholders." The offer is scheduled to expire Nov. 3. 

Separately, a hearing is scheduled for Monday in Delaware Chancery Court on a motion by certain Telerate shareholders seeking a court order to block the Dow Jones tender offer. 

Dow Jones paid between $10 and $15 a share for most of the 63.6 million Telerate shares it owns.
The shares were purchased in various transactions, starting in August 1985.
However, Dow Jones paid $28.75 a share for one block of about 10.5 million Telerate shares in September 1987.
That price represented a premium of 16.8% above the then-market price of Telerate shares. 

In addition to The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones publishes Barron's, various community newspapers, and operates financial news services and computer databases. 

