.START 

The New York Post plans to close down its Sunday edition after launching it just eight months ago with much fanfare. 

Peter Kalikow, owner and publisher of the Post, announced that he would discontinue the edition, which he initially started in the hopes of luring upscale readers and retail advertisers that shunned the more sensational tabloid in favor of the New York Times and the Daily News. 

Industry observers and analysts still are unsure whether folding the Sunday Post will guarantee that the paper will survive.
When Rupert Murdoch sold the paper to Mr. Kalikow, it was posting losses of $10 million a year by conservative estimates.
In its first 10 weeks, the Sunday edition alone was estimated to have recorded a deficit of as much as $7 million. 

Mr. Kalikow and Editor Jerry Nachman assembled employees in the paper's newsroom in lower Manhattan yesterday afternoon to break the news, which had been rumored in recent weeks.
Post executives had denied earlier reports that the Sunday edition was closing down. 

Mr. Kalikow said the death of the Sunday paper is no indication that the Post itself is in danger of closing down, as some industry observers have speculated.
By closing down the Sunday Post, he said in a statement, the Post "foresees a profitable year in 1990." The Post's last Sunday edition will be Nov. 26. 

Mr. Kalikow blamed the demise of the Sunday Post on the soft ad market in the New York area and on low circulation. "The economics just aren't there," he said. 

While there has been a wave of new Sunday newspapers launched in small to medium-sized cities in the last decade, the Post was by far the largest newspaper to launch a Sunday edition in years.
While Post executives had expected circulation would reach 500,000, Valerie Salembier, president of the Post, said the Sunday circulation has reached only about 250,000. 

"In any other city, 250,000 would be considered great, but it just wasn't enough in New York," said Ms. Salembier. 

Ms. Salembier said about 30 people in circulation, ad sales and other business departments would lose their jobs. "What we don't know about is the number of layoffs on the editorial side," she said. "The editorial side is more complicated," she added, saying that editorial layoffs will be announced later. 

The paper has been particularly hurt by declines in the level of real estate and retail advertising, and by the fact that the Sunday paper could not attract any coupons from national companies.
In late September, the paper announced its was canceling its weekly real estate section.
The section had shrunk from more than 20 pages to six pages recently as a result of declines in advertising. 

Months earlier, Mr. Kalikow had already begun to scale back the Sunday Post.
In May, the Post said it would scratch all supplements in the Sunday edition, including USA Weekend magazine, and cut the $1 price to 40 cents. 

Ms. Salembier said closing the Sunday paper was a "big disappointment" but the right move. "We were losing a lot of money.
While Peter {Kalikow} has deep pockets, it makes sense to put our resources into our Monday through Saturday product," she said. 

