.START 

An enormous turtle has succeeded where the government has failed: He has made speaking Filipino respectable. 

The 6 1/2-foot-tall turtle, Pong Pagong, is a character who stars in the children's television show "Batibot." He speaks only in Filipino. 

"Batibot," which started in 1983 as a hybrid of the U.S. program "Sesame Street," has developed into a distinctly Philippine effort.
Radio programs and books have followed the daily television show. 

In the process, "Batibot," an archaic Filipino word meaning "strong" or "enduring," has become a powerful advocate of the use of the Filipino language. "It impresses on ordinary, young Filipinos that there's nothing to feel inferior about in using their own language," says Randy David, a sociologist and host of a popular television talk show. 

"When we started the program six years ago, the use of Filipino was deemed unwise by the predominantly middle class," says Lydia Brown, the program's creator.
Now, she says, "it's no longer an issue." 

The success of "Batibot" stands in marked contrast to many academic and government attempts to promote Filipino as a national language.
Filipino -- once known as Pilipino -- is predominantly Tagalog, the Malay-based language spoken in a part of the country's principal island of Luzon. 

Resistance to a national language comes primarily from members of the country's elite, who generally prefer English.
But while better-off Filipinos are quick to cite the logic in using a language as widespread as English, they are often slow to reveal that they are prejudiced against Filipino, say advocates of the native language. "For the middle and upper-middle class {Filipino} is declasse," says Bien Lumbera, a Philippine-studies professor at Quezon City's University of the Philippines. 

There's also resentment.
Other opponents of Filipino come from non-Tagalog regions. They argue that their own languages should have equal weight, although recent surveys indicate that the majority of the country's population understands Filipino more than any other language. (There are seven major languages and more than 70 dialects in the country.) 

What tongue to speak is an emotional mine field in the Philippines.
It is entrenched in the country's colonial bonds to the U.S., in Philippine class structure, in the regional loyalties of its people and in its island geography.
As they did when the Philippines was a colony of the U.S., teachers for the most part teach in English, even though it is a foreign language for most Philippine children.
As a result, they often speak one language at home, another at school.
Mrs. Brown calls the modern-day cultural ambivalence to Filipino a "language schizophrenia." 

The issue has been simmering for years.
It doesn't take much to provoke an intense debate.
When President Corazon Aquino, whose command of Filipino is spotty, announced last year that the language would be used in official communications, there was an uproar from many legislators, who continue to conduct debates mostly in English. 

But many proponents of Filipino see resistance to the language finally crumbling.
They believe the media, including "Batibot," have played a crucial role. 

According to chief scriptwriter Rene Villanueva, "Batibot" doesn't set out to advance the cause of Filipino. "It's not as if we're teaching language per se," he says, "We're just using it." 

These days, "Batibot" is produced in a converted lumberyard on a shoestring budget of $3,000 a one-hour segment.
It is shown weekdays on two of the country's five networks. 

With an audience totaling more than 400,000, "Batibot" consistently ranks in the country's top-four most-watched daytime programs.
But advertising revenue is inadequate.
Periodically, there are threats that the program will fold. 

"Batibot" lacks the polish of "Sesame Street." Sound stages echo.
Acting sometimes falls flat.
There are only two large puppets in the program: Pong Pagong and a monkey named Kiko Matsing. 

But the production is the equal of any local program.
And the show's creativity makes up for any technological deficiencies.
The program isn't afraid to tackle controversial topics such as nuclear weapons and the environment. 

Not that the language war is won, even on "Batibot." During one recent episode, all the advertisements were in English. 

