.START 

The current debate over reinvigorating individual retirement accounts boils down to this: Would you prefer your tax break as an appetizer or as dessert? 

Democrats would give taxpayers an immediate incentive to sock away more savings: Save $2,000, and you can deduct $1,000 on your tax return. 

Republicans would defer the tax break: Save $2,000, and you'll escape taxes on all the interest that sum earns over the years till you retire. 

Addressing the nation's savings shortage is once again politically fashionable.
And there is ample reason for concern.
The dearth of savings limits the resources available for investment in the future and forces the U.S. to import foreign savings. 

But some economists suggest the politicians' new infatuation with IRAs may be misplaced at a time when Congress and the president aren't taking the more important step of shrinking the federal budget deficit. "If increasing savings is the object," says economist Jane Gravelle of the Congressional Research Service, "a reduction in the deficit would be a more certain and more powerful way of achieving such an end." (The nation's total savings is what's left after substracting government borrowing from household and corporate savings.) 

The differences between the two IRA alternatives involve more than partisan manuevering -- although there's plenty of that. 

The shortcoming of offering immediate rewards for putting money in an IRA, as the Democrats propose, is that it will widen the budget deficit by an estimated $12.5 billion over the next five years. "The big problem is the up-front cost," says Sen. William Roth (R., Del.), chief Republican cheerleader for IRAs. 

The shortcomings of delaying the reward, as Sen. Roth and Sen. Robert Packwood (R., Ore.) propose, is that it may not boost savings much and, if it does, it may widen deficits in the future. "It looks like you haven't given anything away, but five, 10, 20, 40 years later, little bomblets go off," says Henry Aaron, a Brookings Institution economist. 

Although IRA fans in Congress have been talking about restoring incentives that were curtailed in 1986, they gained momentum only after Senate Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) seized on IRAs as an alternative to cutting capital-gains taxes. 

Republican senators, unwilling to concede the popular IRA issue to Democrats, suddenly embraced a scheme Sen. Roth had been pressing with little success.
The Bush administration, which was planning to unveil an IRA proposal of its own next year, was quick to do the same.
Both proposals would allow withdrawals not only for retirement, but also for buying a house or paying tuition bills. 

Between 1981 and 1986, any worker could put $2,000 a year into an IRA and deduct that sum from his taxable income.
As banks and mutual funds advertised heavily, hundreds of billions of dollars flowed into the accounts. 

Economists still disagree on how much was new savings and how much was shifts of existing savings by taxpayers in order to cut their tax bill.
Economist David Wise of Harvard University figures 70% was actually new savings; many prominent economists -- including Michael Boskin, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers -- agree that IRAs did result in significant new savings. 

But Mr. Aaron, among others, continues to insist that the data are inconclusive.
And Robert McIntyre, director of the labor-backed Citizens for Tax Justice and an admirer of the 1986 Tax Reform Act that limited IRAs, goes further. "They don't work," he contends. "They just give people a tax break for savings they would have done anyway." 

In any event, IRA contributions fell sharply after the 1986 law that restricted the full tax break to couples earning less than $40,000 a year and individuals earning less than $25,000.
Balances in IRA and Keogh accounts (retirement accounts for the self-employed), which had swelled by $75 billion in 1986, grew by only $48 billion in 1988, including interest on past contributions. 

It isn't clear how Americans would react to the new IRA proposals because they are so different from the old scheme. 

Some economists predict any IRA plan will boost savings because brokerage houses, mutual funds and banks will advertise them heavily. "It may well be that saving, like life insurance, is sold, not bought," says Lawrence Summers of Harvard University.
He notes that as IRA ads vanished, even many middle-income Americans still eligible for the full IRA tax break stopped contributing. 

Comparing the two proposals on the table, many economists say a rational person ought to prefer the Republican version because it offers a much bigger tax break. 

Under the Democratic plan, a 40-year-old in the 33% tax bracket who saves $2,000 in an IRA would cut his tax bill by $175 immediately.
When he retires 25 years later, his $2,000 -- assuming it were invested at 5% -- would be worth $6,773.
But $5,773 of that would be taxed when withdrawn from the 

Republicans wouldn't give any up-front deduction for depositing $2,000 in the IRA.
But at retirement 25 years later, the entire $4,773 in interest could be withdrawn taxfree, along with the already taxed $2,000 initial contribution. 

Nonetheless, some economists argue that Americans simply won't save unless the government gives them an immediate reward. "This instant gratification overcomes the usual bias against savings," says John Skinner, a University of Virginia economist.
The clincher, he says, is that people who owed money to the Internal Revenue Service were far more likely to put money in an IRA than those who were due a refund. 

On the other hand, the case for delayed gratification is bolstered by evidence that a surprising number of upper-income Americans still are putting money in IRAs even though the only tax break is deferring tax on the interest the contributions earn. 

The Employee Benefit Research Institute says about 23% of all workers earning more than $50,000 a year made IRA deposits in 1987, down from 56% in 1982 but still nearly one million people. 

Donald Underwood, head of retirement planning for Merrill Lynch & Co., says he was surprised to discover that more money flowed into the firm's IRA accounts in 1988 than in 1987. (A big IRA fan, Mr. Underwood's license plate reads: 

Merrill Lynch is convinced the Republican IRA plan would appeal to its customers, and it is lobbying strongly for it. "I think people are really concerned about what the tax rate will be in the future," Mr. Underwood says.
The higher tax rates go in the future, of course, the more valuable the future tax breaks. 

The bigger the incentive the government offers for savings, the more tax revenues a scheme would lose -- or so many economists reason. 

But that's not how Sen. Roth and his allies look at it.
First, they would allow people with old-fashioned IRAs to shift the money to the new ones as long as they pay tax -- at today's lower tax rates -- on the previously deducted contributions.
That would raise $11.5 billion for the Treasury over the next five years, congressonal tax experts estimate.
But allowing the interest buildup on those contributions to escape taxation would cost the Treasury far more than that sum in the long run, the Congressional Budget Office says. "It's a huge giveaway," Mr. Summers protests. 

Second, Sen. Roth insists that the extra savings his plan would produce would spur so much extra economic growth that the Treasury wouldn't suffer.
The claim is an echo of the supply-side promise that the 1981 tax cuts that bear Sen. Roth's name would finance themselves through added growth or added savings. 

