.START 

Regional thrift regulators charged that phone calls were bugged during the examination of Lincoln Savings & Loan Association and that federal officials in Washington delayed Lincoln's seizure until its $2.5 billion cost made it the most expensive thrift failure ever. 

"Clearly, we were shot in the back . . . as we battled to protect the taxpayers," said William Black, acting district counsel for the San Francisco region of thrift regulators. 

In a day of extraordinary testimony before the House Banking Committee, officials from the San Francisco Office of Thrift Supervision also testified that a Big Eight accounting firm, Arthur Andersen & Co., participated in back-dating loan documents and that the Washington officials even agreed in one document not to prosecute Lincoln over certain infractions. 

The hearing may also add to the unease of Sens.
Alan Cranston (D., Calif.) and Dennis DeConcini (D., Ariz.), who are being scrutinized for intervening on behalf of Lincoln, a unit of American Continental Corp., Phoenix, Ariz.
The officials said Sen. DeConcini and an aide to Sen. Cranston called California state thrift officials to press for a sale of Lincoln, instead of its seizure. 

Witnesses said the room in which California examiners were auditing Lincoln this past spring was bugged.
According to a government memo, regulators who took control of the thrift in August discovered that a phone line in Lincoln's headquarters in Irvine, Calif., had been "compromised" to allow calls to be monitored on other extensions.
It didn't say who was monitoring the calls, but said the matter was turned over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 

A Lincoln spokesman said its management "never authorized or participated in any bugging of anyone." 

The regional officials said Washington's chief thrift regulator, Danny Wall, and his principal lieutenants repeatedly ignored warnings that Lincoln was being operated in a reckless manner, certain to cause its failure.
They also accused Mr. Wall of holding improper meetings with Lincoln officials, while refusing to listen to field examiners. 

Members of the Banking Committee generally received the regional officials as bureaucratic heroes and sharply criticized their Washington bosses, who had relieved them of their responsibility for Lincoln two years before the thrift's parent filed for bankruptcy-law protection. 

Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas) said Mr. Wall "willingly cut the legs out from under his regulatory troops in the middle of the battle," and renewed his call for Mr. Wall to step aside.
Rep. Joseph Kennedy (D., Mass.) said, "The higher up in the regulatory process, the more corrupt it would appear." 

Mr. Wall is scheduled to testify Nov. 7, and his agency said that all sides of the issue should be heard before drawing conclusions.
Separately, other Washington thrift officials disputed the regional examiners' statement that they had called specifically for the seizure of Lincoln in 1987, saying that it was only one option they presented. 

The regional officials also said that Arthur Andersen backdated data to support loans that were made with no underwriting standards.
Over two years, until April 1986, $1 billion in loans were approved, even though Lincoln had no written loan standards, said Mike Patriarca, acting principal supervisory agent with the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Fifty-two loans were made in March 1986, he said, and none had credit reports or other background work completed. 

"At a later time, the files looked good because they had been stuffed," Mr. Patriarca said.
Leonard Bickwit, a Washington attorney for Lincoln, conceded that some memos had been written after the fact.
He said that "memorialization of underwriting activities that had been undertaken at an earlier time" did occur, but that Lincoln believed it adhered to lending standards superior to the industry average. 

A spokesman for Arthur Andersen denied any improprieties, adding, "At the request of our then-client, we provided staff personnel to work for a limited period of time under the direction of client personnel to assist them in organizing certain files." 

The matter is under active criminal investigation at the Justice Department, Mr. Black said. 

The hearings also disclosed that Washington officials promised in May 1988 not to launch any civil or criminal actions based on an examination in which regional officials concluded that Lincoln was being operated in an unsafe and unsound manner. 

"Giving up the right to make criminal referrals to me is inconceivable," Mr. Black said. 

The committee also heard testimony from two officials who said that Sens.
Cranston and DeConcini, who received campaign contributions from Lincoln Chairman Charles Keating Jr., arranged for telephone calls on their behalf to state thrift regulators.
The officials said both calls encouraged a sale of Lincoln to an outside buyer, which Mr. Keating sought, rather than putting it in receivership. 

A spokesman for Sen. Cranston said that telephone-company records for three months disclosed no phone calls to the state regulators from his office.
An aide to Sen. DeConcini said the phone call to a top California thrift regulator was "informational." 

