.START 

Democratic leaders have bottled up President Bush's capital-gains tax cut in the Senate and may be able to prevent a vote on the issue indefinitely. 

Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) said he intends to use Senate procedures to force advocates of the tax cut to come up with at least 60 votes before they can address the issue.
And neither Democrats nor Republicans are predicting that the capital-gains forces can produce enough votes. 

"The 60-vote requirement will be there and they don't have the 60 votes," Sen. Mitchell said. "They don't have the votes to get it passed." 

Sen. Bob Packwood (R., Ore.), the leading Republican proponent of the tax cut, didn't disagree. "I'm not sure what's going to happen," he said.
Previously he had said he would be able to find the requisite 60 votes eventually. 

Sen. Packwood has offered his capital-gains-cut package as an amendment to a bill, now pending in the Senate, that would authorize aid to Poland and Hungary.
Democrats are holding up a vote on the amendment by threatening a filibuster, or extended debate.
For a cloture vote to stop the filibuster, Republicans must muster at least 60 votes. 

Yesterday, Sen. Packwood acknowledged, "We don't have the votes for cloture today." 

The Republicans show no sign of relenting.
GOP leaders continued to press for a vote on the amendment to the Eastern Europe aid measure.
And they threatened to try to amend any other revenue bill in the Senate with the capital-gains provision. 

"This is serious business; we're serious about a capital-gains reduction," said Kansas Sen. Robert Dole, the Senate's Republican leader. "The strategy is `Let's vote. ' " 

The Republicans contend that they can garner a majority in the 100-member Senate for a capital-gains tax cut.
They accuse the Democrats of unfairly using Senate rules to erect a 60-vote hurdle.
Democrats counter that the Republicans have often used the same rules to suit their own ends. 

The two sides also traded accusations about the cost of the Packwood plan.
Democrats asserted that the proposal, which also would create a new type of individual retirement account, was fraught with budget gimmickry that would lose billions of dollars in the long run.
Republicans countered that long-range revenue estimates were unreliable. 

The Packwood proposal would reduce the tax depending on how long an asset was held.
It also would create a new IRA that would shield from taxation the appreciation on investments made for a wide variety of purposes, including retirement, medical expenses, first-home purchases and tuition. 

A White House spokesman said President Bush is "generally supportive" of the Packwood plan. 

