.START 

Charter One Financial Inc., a bank holding company, expects to report that third-quarter net income jumped 30% to $4.5 million, Charles John Koch, president and chief executive officer, said. 

On a per-share basis, earnings are estimated at 64 cents to 66 cents.
In the year-ago quarter, Charter One earned $3.4 million, or 51 cents a share.
Last year's figures have been restated to reflect the August 1989 mergers of Western Reserve Savings Bank in Cleveland and First Federal Savings of Akron with Charter One.
In connection with the mergers, Charter One issued 1,063,946 common shares.
The company currently has 6.6 million shares outstanding. 

In an interview, the chief executive attributed the improved results to strength in its core operations, as well as higher volume of loans and fee income, especially relating to tax-deferred annuities.
He noted that Charter One also had a more profitable loan mix, with gains in both consumer and commercial loans.
The thrift's largest loan category is residential mortgages. 

Because of the mergers, the company had $750,000 in nonrecurring expenses in the latest quarter.
Those expenses, however, were offset by a gain of about $1.7 million on the sale of 35,000 shares of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.
The company retains 421,000 shares of Freddie Mac, but expects to continue to sell about 30,000 shares a quarter. 

For the year, Mr. Koch said the company expects to earn $13 million, or $1.85 to $1.88 a share, up from a restated $9.5 million a year ago.
The company's book value as of Sept. 30 was $23.20 a share, up 17% from a year ago.
Mr. Koch said the increase was due in large part to the addition of the two thrifts. 

Mr. Koch also said that Ohio's strong economy has helped Charter One, as well as other thrifts in the state.
In a year when scores of such institutions failed in Texas, Oklahoma, Arizona and other states, Mr. Koch said only a few of Ohio's 221 thrifts have failed. "The institutions in Ohio that failed were primarily those that made loans outside of Ohio," he said. "Those that have succeeded have continued to lend in local areas." 

In addition to Cleveland and Akron, First Federal Savings also serves the Youngstown and Portsmouth areas and in Toledo operates under the name of People's Savings. 

