.START 

Pilots of Federal Express Corp. voted to reject affiliation with the Air Line Pilots Association, giving a resounding victory to the company's founder and chairman, Frederick W. Smith. 

In the National Mediation Board election, 709 pilots voted to support the union, out of a total electorate of 2,022 Federal Express aviators.
The results were unexpectedly dismal for the pro-union side, especially given that some 960 eligible voters were former Tiger International Inc. pilots who had been longtime ALPA members.
Federal Express bought Tiger in February for $880 million. 

"We're stunned," said Barney Barnhardt, a captain and leader of the pro-ALPA campaign. "Apparently, we lost a lot of the Tiger votes.
I don't know why." 

Mr. Smith had campaigned hard against the union, insisting in company materials that a union would infuse unnecessary confict into the company's employee relations.
A pilots' union would have been Federal Express's first major collective bargaining unit in the U.S., and company executives had feared that it would soften Federal's gung-ho, customer-driven culture. 

"The company feels very gratified" with the vote, said T. Allan McArtor, Federal's senior vice president, air operations. "We like to think that the Federal Express management can deal directly with its pilots without a union's intervention." Mr. Smith, through a spokesman, declined to be interviewed yesterday. 

In Washington, ALPA issued a statement saying the union was "disappointed" with the election's outcome.
It said it filed an objection with the National Mediation Board, protesting "improprieties" in the vote.
Specifically, the union is contending, among other charges, that Federal Express misled pilots by calling the Flight Crewmembers Handbook a valid contract. 

Mr. Barnhardt said Federal was apparently successful in its effort to persuade former Tiger pilots to give the company a chance without a union.
The company had told pilots that it's much easier to vote in a union than to vote one out. "It looks like the `let's-give-it-a-year campaign' worked," said Mr. Barnhardt. 

As for the veteran Federal pilots, Mr. Barnhardt said the pro-union side had counted on getting at least 100 of them to support ALPA.
But it seems many fewer than that actually voted for the union, probably because of fears that union rules would hurt them in their battle over seniority issues against the former Tiger pilots. 

Depending on how a mediator reconciles the different job classifications of Federal and Tiger, Federal Express still faces possible union elections this fall among airplane mechanics, ramp workers and stock clerks. 

In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Federal's shares closed at $52, down 12.5 cents. 

