.START 

When Adolph Coors Co. announced the appointment of William Coors as president late Wednesday, Peter Coors wasn't promoted -- at least not officially. 

But the announcement by the big Golden, Colo., brewer was an implicit statement of Peter Coor's rising role at the company, analysts say.
It also underscores the difficult task ahead as Coors attempts to purchase Stroh Brewery Co. and fight off increasingly tough competition from Anheuser-Busch Cos. 

The latest management shuffling at Coors seemed to focus on Jeffrey Coors, who will relinquish the president's post to his uncle William, who is 73.
The elder Coors has been chairman since 1970.
Jeffrey, who at 44 is one year older than his brother Peter, will head up Coors Technology Co., a small unit he has run for several years. 

But Coors insists the administrative changes won't really shift responsibilities at the company.
Indeed, a spokesman for Coors said that since January, Peter has been reporting directly to William, rather than to his brother.
The change in titles "makes the structure conform to the reality," the spokesman said. (William, the brothers, another brother Joe Jr., and their father Joseph Sr. all serve on the company's nine-member board.) 

According to analysts, the changes reflect the tough task the company faces in integrating the operations and marketing efforts of Stroh and Coors, steering the merger through the Justice Department and continuing to fight the battle Coors is waging with Anheuser and Miller Brewing Co., a unit of Philip Morris Cos. 

"It's gray-beard time," said Tom Pirko, president of Bevmark Inc., a Los Angeles consulting firm, referring to the move of William into the presidency. "This is a time of tremendous risk at the company, and Peter has a tremendous amount of responsibility." Putting William at the helm probably won't increase the elder Coors's imput into the beer business, but "it doesn't hurt to have a senior statesman at the top," he said. 

In a brief telephone interview yesterday, Peter Coors said his uncle "is our leader.
We depend on all his years of experience and knowledge in the industry, and that doesn't change." But in January, Peter said, his uncle told him and his brothers, "You guys run those units." 

Coors stressed that the removal of Jeff from the presidency wasn't a demotion, but would allow him to devote his full attention to his unit.
Coors has continually pointed to the importance of the technology unit to its diversification efforts. 

But overall, "Coors's success or lack thereof depends on the beer business," said Emanuel Goldman, analyst at PaineWebber Inc. in San Francisco. 

Mr. Goldman credits Peter Coors with "pulling Coors's marketing efforts into the 20th century" by pushing for intensified marketing efforts, modern advertising campaigns and significantly higher marketing expenditures.
Analysts also credit Peter with selling other family members on the purchase of Stroh, a transaction that will cost about $425 million and slap a big piece of debt on Coors's books for the first time in the company's history. 

"Peter had a major struggle in getting this done," said Mr. Pirko.
Taking on debt was controversial within the family, Mr. Pirko added, but in the end, "Peter called the shots." 

In yesterday's interview, however, Peter declined to take individual credit for the moves. "We manage as a team here," he said. "The team establishes the goals.
It's the result that's important, not who's the architect or the driving force." 

And Peter will continue to be under the gun, given the dominance of Anheuser, the stubbornly flat beer market of the past decade and recent Coors financial results that have been frustratingly mediocre.
So far this year, Coors' market share has been slipping and so has net income, due to increased costs and increased price competition, the company said. 

Price competition is about to become even more fierce.
Anheuser announced on Wednesday that it would begin discounting Budweiser, its flagship brand, which analysts say will put exceptionally heavy pressure on Coors management in the midst of a major merger. 

Peter Coors, however, said the discounting by Anheuser could also mean that Coors' increased marketing efforts are having an impact.
Furthermore, he said, "I don't know how the industry can get too much tougher.
This is just a signal that the toughness is going to continue." 

