.START 

A New York bankruptcy judge has temporarily stopped the Resolution Trust Corp. from placing an insolvent thrift institution under government control. 

Deltacorp, the holding company that owns the thrift, contends that the federal law empowering the RTC to place failing savings and loan associations under government control conflicts with the federal bankruptcy law, Chapter 

Deltacorp has a bankruptcy petition pending in New York.
The company is scheduled to appear before federal bankruptcy Judge Tina L. Brozman Thursday to ask her to impose a 60-day preliminary injunction on the Office of Thrift Supervision, the enforcement arm of the RTC. Deltacorp hopes within 60 days it will be able to sell the thrift, says its lawyer David M. Friedman, a partner with Gordon Hurwitz Butowsky Weitzen Shalov & Wein in New York. 

If Deltacorp prevails, similarly situated companies will be able to use Chapter 11 to thwart President Bush's program to restructure the trouble S&L industry.
Under Chapter 11, a company operates under protection from creditors' lawsuits while it works out a plan to pay its debts. 

Passed early this year, the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act authorizes the RTC to declare troubled thrift institutions insolvent and place them in receivership.
The RTC can then close the thrift institution and sell it whole or in parts.
Established three months ago, the RTC has taken over 256 thrifts valued at $95.6 billion. 

The RTC was on the verge of placing Colonial Savings Bank of Roselle, N.J., a subsidiary of Deltacorp, into receivership.
This week Deltacorp persuaded Judge Brozman to issue a temporary restraining order, arguing that before its thrift was taken over the apparent conflict between the two federal laws should be resolved. 

According to Mr. Friedman, the RTC's pending takeover would impair the company's ability under Chapter 11 to recoup loses by putting its subsidiary up for bid.
Mr. Friedman claims Deltacorp estimates that by selling the thrift it could make about $23 million.
If the government sells the thrift, the company will make far less, he contends. 

"If the court were to issue the injunction, it would set a significant precedent," says Mr. Friedman, who says he doesn't know how many other companies are in a position to use the bankruptcy law as a shelter against RTC takeovers. 

Jerome Kowalski, a partner with Parker Chapin Flattau & Klimpl who has clients in situations similar to Deltacorp, says lawyers would be "foolish not to tell clients to follow" the Deltacorp strategy. 

The Office of Thrift Supervision failed to return numerous phone calls. 

REAGAN TOOK more than 10 months on average to nominate federal judges. 

That's the conclusion of a study by Daniel Meador, a law professor at the University of Virginia.
Mr. Meador, a former assistant attorney general, criticizes what he calls "inordinate delays" in filling federal judgeships and suggests the creation of a permanent office on judicial nominations within the Justice Department. 

Federal judges in Washington, D.C., and other areas complained recently that long-standing vacancies have contributed to mounting backlogs of cases.
Forty-five federal judgeships are vacant nationwide. 

Mr. Meador, whose study appears in the fall issue of the University of Virginia's Journal of Law & Politics, writes that "it is not rare for two or more years to pass before the administration sends a nomination to the Senate." His study covers the years 1979 to 1988. 

Under Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, a committee of ten senior Justice Department officials evaluate potential judicial nominees and send recommendations to the White House.
Congressional Democrats have accused Mr. Thornburgh of delaying the nomination process. 

But a spokesman for the the attorney general said the Senate Judiciary Committee contributed to the problem by failing to act on nominations made during the final months of the Reagan administration. 

U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE upholds New York's "Son of Sam" law. 

The state law, designed to prevent lawbreakers from profitting from such things as books and movies about their crimes, survived its first federal challenge in a ruling by Judge John F. Keenan in federal court in New York. 

Simon & Schuster Inc. sued to have the law declared unconstitutional, claiming it restricts publishers' freedom of speech.
The company filed the suit in 1986 after the "Son of Sam" law was applied to "Wiseguy: Life in a Mafia Family," a best-seller by Nicholas Pileggi.
The book was based on the life of Henry Hill, whom the court refers to as a "career criminal" and who received payments from the publisher in return for his life story. 

Simon & Schuster said many books about criminal activities would never be published if criminals couldn't be paid for their stories, and that this had a chilling effect on the publishing industry. 

But Judge Keenan said, "Although it may be more difficult for publishers and authors to create books with the cooperation of a criminal source {under the "Son of Sam" law}, it is not impossible nor is such cooperation proscribed." The judge added, "The speech itself is not the target of {the state law}; the profit-making aspect is the target." 

A spokeswoman for Simon & Schuster said the New York company would appeal the ruling. 

BAKER & McKENZIE Moscow bound. 

The Chicago law firm, the world's largest, will open the first Soviet-accredited office of a foreign law firm in Moscow later this year. 

Coudert Brothers, a New York law firm, and Arnold & Porter and Heron, Burchette, Ruckert & Rothwell, both in Washington, D.C., have had lawyers in the Soviet Union under the auspices of companies' trade offices or in unofficial capacities.
But 1,400-lawyer Baker & McKenzie will open a full-fledged branch. 

The firm will have 46 offices in 27 countries.
It became the first foreign firm with an Eastern European branch when it opened in Budapest two years ago. 

Three lawyers, headed by partner Paul J. Melling, will be in Moscow full-time.
Ten lawyers from the firm's other offices will work with them.
Fifteen joint ventures have already signed on as clients, according to Robert W. Cox, chairman of the firm. 

ILLINOIS JUDGE joins firm. 

After nine years in the state judiciary, William R. Quinlan, 49 years old, has joined the Chicago law firm of Phelan, Pope & John as a partner.
He will specialize in complex commercial and environmental litigation at the 75-lawyer firm. 

In a Oct. 23 resignation letter to Illinois Gov. James R. Thompson, Mr. Quinlan said he could no longer sit on the bench and fulfill financial responsibilities to his family.
He said that while education costs and living expenses spiralled, judicial salaries in Illinois haven't increased for four years.
Mr. Quinlan was appointed to the Illinois Appellate Court in 1985.
He served as a Circuit Court judge in Cook County, Ill., and corporation counsel for the city of Chicago. 

"The judiciary is called upon to decide the most important issues facing our society.
But we're not spending the money to staff it with the best people we can get or keeping the best people there," says Mr. Quinlan. 

DISNEY SUES Amvest for copyright infringement. 

Noting that the Happy Hampster isn't one of its creations, Walt Disney Co. filed a $17 million suit in federal court against Amvest Video Corp., of Rahway, N.J. 

Disney alleges Amvest violated its copyrights at least 170 times in at least 23 video cassettes, some of them full-length Disney movies such as Bambi and Fantasia.
The suit also alleges Amvest created a character called the Happy Hampster which it is trying to pass off as a Disney character. 

In addition to the $17 million in damages -- $100,000 for each copyright infringement -- Disney is seeking unspecified punitive damages. 

A spokeswoman for Amvest had no comment and said the company hadn't yet seen the suit. 

