.START 

Sony Corp. asked a Los Angeles court to deny Warner Communications Inc. 's request for an injunction preventing Hollywood producers Peter Guber and John Peters from taking over the management of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. 

The Japanese concern made its request in Los Angeles Superior Court, where Warner last week filed a $1 billion breach of contract suit against Sony.
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters are currently under contract to produce movies exclusively for Warner.
Sony, which has agreed to pay $3.5 billion and to assume $1.5 billion in debt to buy Columbia, is also offering $200 million for Guber Peters Entertainment Co., of which the producers are co-chairmen and own a combined 28% stake. 

While executives from both sides say the matter still could be settled, papers filed in the court by Sony appear to heighten the acrimony of Hollywood's most-watched legal battle.
Sony claims an injunction would leave it "faced with the ominous possibility that it would complete a $5 billion entertainment company acquisition and be left with no management to run the company." Sony adds that "Warner must be grinning from ear to ear at the possibility of leaving Sony in such a position and at the opportunity to prevent the revitalization of Columbia into a strong competitor." 

Sony disputes Warner's contention that its offer to Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters violates their contract with Warner, which is in the process of being acquired by New York-based Time Warner Inc. Furthermore, Sony claims that the contract as written -- and oral agreements that Warner has denied exist -- allow the producers to take on such executive posts.
Sony's legal argument even raises the novel idea that Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters could actually make movies for Warner while serving in executive posts at another studio. 

Sony acknowledges that Warner's contract prevents the Guber-Peters team from being producers or executive producers of movies for another studio.
But, Sony says, that doesn't exclude them from taking an executive post at another company where they would be involved in choosing movies and in managing, but not in day-to-day production of movies.
Sony says Columbia "could allow Guber and Peters to produce motion pictures for Warner as soon as the acquisition is consummated." 

But Sony also says in its filing that the Warner contract "doesn't require that Guber and Peters take any affirmative steps to produce motion pictures; it simply rewards them when they do and prohibits them from producing for another entertainment company." And Sony says Warner has already shown it doesn't need the producers "by taking action to prevent Guber and Peters from completing production in Warner properties." 

Among the arguments Sony makes is that Warner should let the producers go to Columbia because it already allowed the producers to become co-chairmen of publicly held Barris Industries Inc., which earlier this year changed its name to Guber Peters Entertainment.
Sony also says in its filing that Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters were offered management posts at Columbia once before in 1987, and that "Warner approved and encouraged them to do so." 

But in a sworn affidavit last week, Warner Bros.
Chairman Robert Daly denied that.
Mr. Daly said that Mr. Guber had mentioned such an offer, and that he responded that "I thought the idea was a bad one from his point of view, and I understand he dropped the idea shortly thereafter." 

The two sides did some rival-bashing yesterday as well.
In a sworn declaration, Walter Yetnikoff, president of Sony's CBS Records unit, said Warner Chairman Steven Ross has an "anti-Japanese, anti-Sony" bias.
But Stuart Rabinowitz, Warner's outside counsel, says Sony "violates American business morality by secretly raiding major producers under exclusive contract to Warner." 

In another sworn declaration yesterday, Sony Corp. of America Vice Chairman Michael Schulof said that while he was negotiating with Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters, he relied on the producers' assurances that Warner had previously agreed to let them terminate the contract and wouldn't have any trouble obtaining a release. 

Mr. Guber, meanwhile, in his own sworn declaration yesterday, maintained that running a studio has always been "our professed goal," and that Warner executives made an oral agreement that would free the producers from their contract should the opportunity arise.
Mr. Peters, in his declaration, supported Mr. Guber's claims and said he is "shocked" by the assertions of Warner executives that such an agreement was never made. 

