.START 

France's Banque Indosuez shocked London markets by moving to become the dominant shareholder in prestigious but troubled merchant bank Morgan Grenfell Group PLC. 

Indosuez said it has agreed to purchase Willis Faber PLC's 20.4% stake in Morgan Grenfell, by far the largest single holding in the bank.
That would bring Indosuez's total stake to 24.8%, Indosuez said. 

While awaiting Bank of England permission to pass the 15% mark, Indosuez said, it has agreed to purchase immediately a 10.5% share in the bank for 410 pence ($6.62) a share, bringing its stake to 14.9%.
It then intends to acquire the remaining Willis stake at 462 pence a share.
The transaction still must be cleared by Willis shareholders. 

Morgan Grenfell shares jumped 38 pence to 400 pence on London's stock exchange. 

Indosuez said it has agreed that, barring a major change in Morgan Grenfell's situation, it won't launch a full takeover bid for at least a year.
But despite signs that Morgan Grenfell staff was unhappy at the sudden investment, Indosuez Chairman Antoine Jeancourt-Galignani said he will begin linking the two banks into "an important merchant banking group in Europe." 

In a telephone interview, Morgan Grenfell Chairman John Craven said the Indosuez holding "wasn't one that was taken at our initiative," adding that Morgan Grenfell "remains perfectly confident in the future of our business as an independent entity." 

Mr. Craven added he held "important discussions" yesterday with Indosuez officials about the possible benefits of a combination, and that Morgan Grenfell's attitude "is entirely objective." He added: "My understanding of what I have heard is that their intentions are very long term.
I guess if they get to 25%" Morgan Grenfell would be a troublesome target for another counterbidder, he added. 

In a statement, Morgan Grenfell said it now seeks further clarification of Indosuez's intentions. 

Mr. Jeancourt-Galignani refused to say whether Indosuez will bid for all of Morgan Grenfell when its year is up.
If it does, the operation would be one of the largest foreign purchases of a U.K merchant bank.
It would catapult Indosuez from the position of a marginal London player, with strong Asian and Middle Eastern activities, to the upper levels of the U.K. merchant banking scene.
It is part of Indosuez's overall plan of building its business across Europe, as the 1992 reduction of European Community market barriers looms. 

Mr. Jeancourt-Galignani said Indosuez had to move fast because it feared that another investor -- widely rumored to be Deutsche Bank -- was buying shares heavily.
Indosuez said it believes Deutsche Bank currently has a 4.9% stake, but it refused to say who it believed was buying.
It said Deutsche Bank is the largest other holding it knows of. 

Indosuez completed the purchase in just two weeks, and market sentiment is that Indosuez's rush led it to pay a high price, but French analysts tended to welcome the investment. 

"The logic is that Indosuez is a French investment bank with a lot of market activities, but not a lot of fund management," said Romain Burnand, a financial analyst at Paris brokerage Cholet-Dupont & Cie. 

He said Morgan Grenfell manages about #7 billion pounds ($11.3 billion) in investment funds. "It is a force in the market and has a very good international image," Mr. Burnand said. "The problem is that executives are volatile.
They can leave when they are unhappy." 

