.START 

Some important people plan to gather here soon to say nice things about Brian P. Monieson.
The occasion isn't a tribute to the former Chicago Mercantile Exchange chairman, however, but a hearing at which federal commodity regulators hope to ban him from the futures industry. 

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission alleges that Mr. Monieson was warned that some brokers at his GNP Commodities Inc. were bilking investors and that he failed to stop them promptly.
One of the brokers in question was one of Mr. Monieson's best friends. 

The case has become the most closely watched civil commodity enforcement action in recent memory, with the futures industry's top officials rallying to Mr. Monieson's defense.
His scheduled character witnesses at the Nov. 6 hearing include: U.S. Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter, who was Merc president under Mr. Monieson; Leo Melamed, chairman of the Merc's executive committee, and Robert K. Wilmouth, president of the National Futures Association, an industry-funded regulatory group. 

Mr. Monieson's attorney in the matter is Jerrold E. Salzman, the Merc's influential outside counsel. 

The GNP brokers allegedly "allocated" trades, meaning they initiated futures trades without the required customer account numbers and then kept the profitable ones for themselves and stuck customers with the losers. 

Mr. Monieson, a childhood math whiz and self-described computer nerd, denies these charges and expects that he and GNP will be exonerated.
Noting that GNP processed some nine million trades last year, he says, "Who the (heck) would know what's going on with 50 trades out of nine million?" If he loses at the hearing, Mr. Monieson can appeal to the full panel of CFTC commissioners and then to the federal courts. 

Messrs.
Melamed, Salzman and Wilmouth came to their friend's aid despite the fact that the Merc and the National Futures Association brought similar failure-to-supervise charges against GNP, though not against Mr. Monieson personally. 

To some, the case shows the fallacy of self-regulation, a concept the futures industry cherishes.
In theory, traders and brokers will police themselves because widespread fraud would discredit the industry and frighten away investors.
This "enlightened self-interest" is supposed to overcome the built-in conflicts of interest. 

"The problem with self-regulation is always that the regulators are tinged with self-interest," says David Ruder, the just-departed chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

In this case, Mr. Ruder says, "it would seem they're acting in two capacities -- that people of that stature would testify in a disciplinary case.
One would counsel the avoidance of an appearance of a conflict." Mr. Ruder adds of Mr. Yeutter: "It seems odd that people in high government positions would intervene to testify." 

Mr. Salzman says the Merc gave him permission to represent Mr. Monieson, adding there's no conflict because he has recused himself from the Merc's case. "I've had a long personal relationship with Brian," Mr. Salzman says. "I couldn't say no." 

Mr. Melamed and Mr. Wilmouth both said they see no conflict because their organizations didn't charge Mr. Monieson personally, and they're only testifying to his character.
Mr. Yeutter couldn't be reached for comment. 

In an interview in his corner office in the Merc tower, Mr. Monieson contends he is a victim of his own celebrity. "The CFTC was looking for something high-profile," he says. 

The investigation already has been costly to Mr. Monieson.
In January 1987, he was two weeks away from the sale of his firm for as much as $40 million.
But the deal hit a snag.
The Federal Reserve Board, which had to approve GNP's sale to Banque Indosuez, a French bank, learned of the CFTC investigation. 

A distressed Mr. Monieson called the CFTC, and asked its two top lawyers no fewer than five times to divulge confidential details of its probe into GNP.
They refused, even after Mr. Monieson warned that the deal's collapse would become an "international incident" between the U.S. and France, according to a memo one of the lawyers wrote.
The Banque Indosuez deal fell through. 

Mr. Monieson, 53 years old, wears the expensive clothes of a successful trader but his mannerisms are more those of a preoccupied math professor.
His office is filled with toy pigs to remind him of the fortune he made trading pork bellies.
And behind his desk hangs a more recent sign of success, a futures trader's Picasso: a Leroy Nieman painting, depicting a horse race. 

Mr. Monieson's defense at the CFTC hearing will partly be that he is a busy man and wasn't personally involved in GNP's retail brokerage business.
During his years as Merc chairman, 1983 through 1985, Mr. Monieson played host to prime ministers and crown princes; his attorneys have prepared charts showing the many Merc meetings he attended and the time he spent away on business.
The lawyers probably won't mention his interest in horse racing, though Mr. Monieson says it remains a hobby.
Mr. Monieson, born on Chicago's North Side, by age five was a faithful reader of the Racing Form, regularly joining his father at the track, he says.
Later, he bet the ponies with a high school friend, Myron Rosenthal, who would become his partner in GNP and other ventures. 

In 1965, he and Mr. Rosenthal set up what would become Indecon Inc., a computer processing firm.
An early offshoot was their computerized tip sheet for harness racing -- cranked out using "the same type of equipment used in important space research and big business," Mr. Monieson told subscribers. 

Programming unexpectedly led him into trading in the early 1970s when a customer, a pork processor, commissioned a computer program on the supply and demand of bacon, but never used the program.
Mr. Monieson and Mr. Rosenthal got together $50,000 and started trading pork belly futures at the Merc based on the program's predictions. 

They formed GNP in 1973 not out of any desire to run a futures clearing firm, Mr. Monieson says, but because they were tired of paying brokerage commissions. 

A decade later, GNP was trading all over the Merc floor, mostly in financial futures.
Yet pork bellies still held a fascination for Mr. Monieson, and his trading in that pit would earn him a dubious distinction: the only Merc chairman to be found guilty of committing trading violations while running the exchange. 

Mr. Monieson and Mr. Rosenthal were fined, $10,000 and $70,000 respectively, for taking speculative positions beyond the exchange's limits.
Mr. Rosenthal's fine was bigger because he allegedly had exceeded position limits before. 

Mr. Monieson, likening the fine to "a parking ticket," says he did violate the rules but contends the position limits are set too low for today's trading environment. 

Three associates held pork belly positions nearly identical to those of the GNP owners and appeared to be acting at their direction, according to an internal Merc account of the case.
A company controlled by Mr. Monieson and Mr. Rosenthal lent the other traders more than $6.5 million to help finance the trades. 

One of the associates was Norman Furlett, a GNP salesman and one of Mr. Monieson's closest friends.
Mr. Furlett's job was to call up investors and get them to trade futures.
GNP got a commission. 

Ira P. Greenspon was in the same line of work, and in October 1985 joined GNP.
What GNP didn't know was that Mr. Greenspon already was under investigation by the CFTC for alleged trade allocating at his previous firm.
The CFTC later concluded that Mr. Furlett had been allocating trades as well. 

According to separate Merc charges against the two men and GNP, which haven't been made public, during the first two months of 1986, accounts they maintained, including one named Horse Trading, had profits of $62,372.95.
Four customer accounts the Merc reviewed had combined losses of $20.988.12 for those months.
Robert L. Sutermeister, a retired trucking company owner in Dayton, Ohio, says he lost nearly all of the $10,000 he sent the brokers.
Larry Margler, a McKinleyville, Ca., engineer, says he lost about $3,000 of the $5,000 he turned over to Mr. Furlett. 

Between June 1985 and May 1986, the CFTC alleges, Mr. Monieson was warned by at least five GNP employees that Mr. Furlett and Mr. Greenspon were defrauding customers.
After the Banque Indosuez deal collapsed in January 1987, the two salesmen left GNP.
Their attorney, James Koch, says they deny any wrongdoing and that both men have agreed to leave the futures industry. 

