.START 

In search of buyers for upscale department-store chains such as Bloomingdale's and Saks Fifth Avenue, investment bankers are turning to -- who else?
The Japanese.
But so far Japan's cash-rich retailers are proving to be cautious shoppers. 

"We have the money to buy.
But operating a U.S. department-store chain would be very difficult," says Motoyuki Homma, managing director of the international division at Mitsukoshi Ltd., one of Japan's leading department stores. 

Japanese retail executives say the main reason they are reluctant to jump into the fray in the U.S. is that -- unlike manufacturing -- retailing is extremely sensitive to local cultures and life styles.
The Japanese have watched the Europeans and Canadians stumble in the U.S. market, and they fret that business practices that have won them huge profits at home won't translate into success in the U.S. 

Japanese department stores are also wary of attracting negative publicity.
After Sony Corp. 's recent headline-grabbing acquisition of Columbia Pictures, many say it makes good political sense to lie low. "It's a question of timing," says Mayumi Takayama, managing director of international operations at Isetan Co., a Tokyo department store. 

Still, for those with a long-term eye on the vast U.S. retail market, this is a tempting time to look for bargains.
Britain's B.A.T Industries PLC is trying to unwind its U.S. retailing operations, which include such well-known stores as Saks Fifth Avenue, Marshall Field's, Breuners and Ivey's.
And debt-ridden Campeau Corp. of Toronto is giving up the 17-store Bloomingdale's group. 

"Every department store in Japan is taking a look," says Mike Allen, a retail analyst at Barclay's de Zoete Wedd Securities (Japan) Ltd. Mr. Allen, however, doesn't think that Japan is about to embark on a major buying binge. 

Nonetheless, speculation heated up yesterday when Tokyu Department Store Co. confirmed a report in Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading business daily, that Tokyu is talking with Campeau about buying Bloomingdale's.
Tokyu, however, said no agreement had been reached. 

Nor is Tokyu the only Japanese retailer interested in Bloomingdale's, which bankers in Tokyo estimate could cost between $1 billion and $1.5 billion.
Seven Japanese department-store groups were approached by investment bankers representing Bloomingdale's chairman, Marvin Traub, and more than half are seeking additional information on the group, bankers say. 

What Mr. Traub is hoping to put together, investment bankers say, is a management-led group to buy the New York department-store group that he heads from Campeau's Federated Department Stores subsidiary.
Federated ran into a cash crunch after it was acquired last year by Campeau, which relied heavily on debt to finance the transaction.
Paying off that debt put such a squeeze on Campeau and its stores that Federated decided to sell off the jewels of its retailing empire, including Bloomingdale's. 

Hoping to avoid another takeover, Mr. Traub retained Blackstone Group and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. to help him find partners for a management-led buy-out.
Ideally, investment bankers say, he wants to get backing from a Japanese department store and a European department store to forge a global retailing network. "When you look at the economics, Traub needs a Japanese and a European partner to make it work," says one investment banker who follows the retail industry. "Looking only at a narrow American strategy isn't where it's at." 

Persuading tradition-bound Japanese retailers to get involved in the turmoils of the U.S. retailing industry isn't likely to be so easy, analysts say.
Up until now, most stores have followed the same basic overseas strategy: First they set up overseas merchandising offices to import items and track new fashion trends.
Then they opened small gift shops mostly aimed at Japanese tourists. 

Reluctant to advance further on their own, some stores have settled for tie-ups with famous specialty shops.
Last March, Isetan invested 1.5 billion yen ($10.6 million) in a venture with Barney's Inc., an up-scale New York specialty clothier.
The first Barney's shop is scheduled to open in Japan next year. 

And Mitsukoshi recently increased its equity stake in Tiffany & Co. to 13%.
Through the longstanding relationship between the two companies, Mitsukoshi has opened 22 Tiffany shops in its stores and arcades in Japan.
Plans are under way to open a Tiffany's in Hawaii to cater to Japanese tourists; it will be run mostly by Mitsukoshi. 

Some industry observers say that Mitsukoshi's classy image makes it a possible match for Saks Fifth Avenue.
Company officials say they are studying various proposals but won't discuss details. 

Takashimaya Co., Japan's oldest department store, is another name that keeps popping up as a potential fit with Saks.
Eiji Nakazato, a Takashimaya general manager, admits that his company's image is similar to Saks's and that there is some interest in the idea.
But he stops there. "We'd like to do business in America," he says. "But it looks tough." 

Marcus W. Brauchli contributed to this article. 

Compiled by William Mathewson 

The Vatican was in the red last year. 

It said the regular 1988 deficit amounted to $43.5 million, based on revenue of $74.4 million and expenses of $117.9 million.
But it said extraordinary expenditures for its radio station and restoration of buildings increased the deficit to $57.2 million. 

A statement from the council of cardinals said Catholics had responded generously to an appeal last year to give more money after 1987's record $63 million deficit.
The statement said a 5% jump in the "Peter's Pence" collection -- the annual offering from Catholics to the pope -- helped cover the deficit. 

Council member Cardinal Gerald Carter of Toronto told Vatican Radio: "Now that we say we covered our deficit this year, people are going to relax and say well that's fine, the Holy See is out of the hole.
But we're . . . going to be in the exact same situation next year." 

Former President Richard Nixon is to visit China at the invitation of the government beginning Saturday, the Foreign Ministry announced.
According to Mr. Nixon's office, "This is solely a fact-finding trip. There will be no sightseeing, no shopping and no social events." Mr. Nixon's office said the former president "expects to have one-on-one discussions with the major Chinese leaders" and will give his assessment of those leaders to President Bush upon his return. 

A poll conducted in 12 of 16 NATO countries shows that the Dutch appear to be the strongest supporters of the alliance.
The poll, conducted for the Dutch daily De Telegraaf by Gallup International said 81% of Dutch people supported NATO. Canada was the second most pro-NATO country with 78% supporting the alliance, followed by the U.S. with 75%, Britain with 71%, Belgium with 69% and West Germany with 63%.
All other countries registered support below 50%. 

The Israeli Manufacturers' Association filed a police complaint against an Arab pasta maker for using the four colors of the outlawed Palestinian flag on spaghetti packages. "We asked police to investigate why they are allowed to distribute the flag in this way.
It should be considered against the law," said Danny Leish, a spokesman for the association.
The spaghetti is made by the Al Ghazel Macaroni Co. in Bethlehem and is marketed in a package decorated with green, black, red and white stripes. 

British postal authorities say they have uncovered a large-scale scheme where unscrupulous stamp dealers chemically removed stamp cancellations, regummed the stamps and sold them to U.S. collectors or, in large lots, to British businesses.
The scheme allegedly cost the post office #10 million ($16.1) in revenue in the past 12 months.
Dealers bought the used stamps cheaply from charities, including the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association.
The charities regularly sell used stamps, which they collect from children and other donors, to raise funds. 

Akio Tanii, president of Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., presented the U.S. consul general in Osaka with a $1 million check to help San Francisco's earthquake victims.
The company's U.S. subsidiary, Matsushita Electric Corp. of America, had donated over $35,000 worth of Matsushita-made flashlights and batteries to residents shortly after the disaster, a company spokesman said.
Several other Japanese companies and regional governments have sent aid to San Francisco.
Sumitomo Bank donated $500,000, Tokyo prefecture $15,000 and the city of Osaka $10,000. 

Chinese officials are trying to use the Canton Trade Fair to lure back overseas traders after the bloody crackdown on dissent.
But attendance is down from previous years. 

What's more, a Hong Kong textile trader says, some Chinese exporters from state-run enterprises are protesting the crackdown by dragging their feet on soliciting new business. "They are angry about the government . . . so they hold back the goods," he said. 

This autumn's edition of the biannual fair will run through Oct. 31.
Inside the 156,000-square-yard glass exhibition complex, products ranging from clothing to AK-47 machine guns are on display. 

Fair officials say that 21,000 guests visited during the first five days, a 10% drop from the spring exhibition.
But China's official Xinhua News Agency reported that the number of foreign businessmen was greater than the previous fair -- without providing statistics. 

In another sign of glasnost, Alexander Solzhenitsyn's long-banned chronicle of Soviet repression, "The Gulag Archipelago," is now recommended reading in one 11th-grade Moscow history class. . . . British customs officers said they'd arrested eight men sneaking 111 rare snakes into Britain -- including one man who strapped a pair of boa constrictors under his armpits.
A customs official said the arrests followed a "Snake Day" at Utrecht University in the Netherlands, an event used by some collectors as an opportunity to obtain rare snakes. 

