.START 

Heating oil futures prices fell sharply after some market players moved to reduce their exposure to the vagaries of weather. 

Balmy autumn days might be blissful for the average Joe, but not for the speculators on the New York Mercantile Exchange who bought heating oil aggressively in September and October, betting on an early, harsh winter. 

As October draws to a close, weather is still generally warm in Europe and in the U.S., especially the Northeast where much heating oil is consumed.
In New York Mercantile Exchange trading yesterday, many who had been counting on dips in the mercury started liquidating heating oil. 

The selling pushed November heating oil futures contracts 1.2 cents a gallon lower to 57.24 cents, one of the most sizable moves in either direction during the past several trading sessions.
Petroleum futures prices had been caught in a tug-of-war, pulled in one direction by continuing strong demand and in the opposite direction by continuing high output from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. 

But yesterday's drop in heating oil pushed crude significantly lower, as well.
West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, fell 24 cents a barrel to close at $19.38 a barrel for December delivery.
Some traders have said December WTI could well continue downward to as low as $18.50 a barrel. 

Even reports of a Persian Gulf incident between former war foes Iran and Iraq failed to shake crude's doldrums.
Shipping industry sources said two Iranian gunboats attacked an Iraqi tugboat near an Iraq offshore oil terminal in the northern part of the gulf.
Details remained sketchy, the sources said, but Iraq reportedly didn't consider the attack to be a hostile act. 

Neither did the petroleum markets seem to pay much attention to reports that Alaskan officials had refused to let a Unocal oil tanker dock at a refinery because it didn't have an oil-spill contingency plan approved by the state.
One broker said the markets might have been more bullish had a tanker been refused access to Valdez, the terminal port for the Alaskan pipeline and site last spring of the biggest oil spill in U.S. waters. 

Only gasoline managed to escape the slide that dominated other petroleum futures trading.
Unleaded gasoline for November delivery ended yesterday's session .23 cent a gallon higher at 53.63 cents. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: The prices of wheat futures contracts dipped amid reports of beneficial rain in the winter wheat growing regions of Argentina and forecasts for widespread rain this weekend in the U.S. in winter wheat states such as Kansas and Oklahoma, said Victor Lespinasse, a floor broker for Dean Witter Reynolds, Chicago.
In the U.S., winter wheat is planted in the fall and harvested in the early summer.
The prices of corn futures contracts rose slightly. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices jumped to life, bestirred by a highly volatile stock market and the resignation of a key figure in the Conservative government of British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
December gold climbed above the critical $375-an-ounce level to settle at $375.40, up $3.10.
December silver added 7.7 cents to close at $5.237 an ounce.
January platinum tacked on $3.60 an ounce to settle at $490.
Market analysts said that continued declines and volatility in the stock market contributed generally to enhanced investor interest in precious metals, but that the British political news was the main factor boosting prices: Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson resigned.
Sir Alan Walters, Mrs. Thatcher's economic adviser, also announced that he will resign.
With the metals markets closed in London when the news was announced, a lot of U.K. buying came to the U.S., said Peter Cardillo, commodities trading adviser for Josephthal & Co. in New York.
Mr. Cardillo noted that the drop in the British pound following Mr. Lawson's resignation fueled the metals' rally as investors sought a safe haven.
He said he believes the rally in the metals is going to be very short-lived.
William O'Neill, research director of Elders Futures Inc., said that if December gold can close above $375 for two consecutive days, he would regard that as a bullish sign.
However, he expected any strong rallies to be met by producer selling. "Both the Soviet Union and South Africa must sell these rallies," he said.
The two countries are major producers of precious metals.
But he also noted that if uncertainty continues in the stock market, that might create some investor interest in precious metals.
That interest has been lacking for a long time, he said. 

COPPER: Futures prices fell.
The December contract dropped 1.35 cents to settle at $1.142 a pound.
Mr. O'Neill said copper's price action this week indicates general weakness. "It easily violated major support at $1.19 and then {yesterday} closed under secondary support at $1.15," he said.
He believes the next area of technical support is at the $1.10 level.
Mr. O'Neill said the market was hit on Wednesday with the news that the atmosphere surrounding the negotiations on the strike at Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, may have improved.
But he said he doubts that a settlement is anywhere in sight.
He also believes that the market may have already discounted any good news that might be associated with this strike.
Mr. Cardillo said that copper is reflecting a weakening U.S. economy and that he would be neither a buyer nor a seller at these levels. 

COCOA: Futures prices dropped again, extending the declining trend.
The December contract settled at $961 a metric ton, off $38.
The contract's low point yesterday, $956, was both a life-of-contract low and a 14-year low price for cocoa.
The decline was apparently sparked by rumors that the Ivory Coast, a major African producer, sold 20,000 tons in London on Wednesday.
Mr. O'Neill said the market is so fragile and weak that it can't absorb any selling.
Bert Ruiz, soft commodity specialist at Balfour, Maclaine Futures Inc., said that all week he has seen increasing open interest and declining prices -- an almost certain sign that additional selling of contracts is taking place.
Open interest is the number of outstanding contracts that remain to be settled either by an opposite trade or delivery. "I think trade interests are hedging their physical cocoa with new sales," he said.
He also pointed out that the volume on Wednesday was 8,839 contracts, which for cocoa is extremely heavy.
Mr. Ruiz said that the producers of cocoa have no choice but to sell their stocks because of their need for hard currencies.
He believes that the major cocoa buyers are well aware of the sad state of the market and are taking advantage of the weakening prices by doing "scale-down buying." That is, they mostly buy just enough cocoa to satisfy their current needs -- a common strategy in a falling market. 

