.START 

GORBACHEV ANNOUNCED unilateral cuts of nuclear arms in the Baltic region. 

The Kremlin leader unveiled a plan to reduce nuclear weapons in the Baltic Sea, including the scrapping of Moscow's nuclear-armed submarines by 1991.
Gorbachev, on an official visit to Finland, also said the Soviet Union has removed all tactical nuclear missiles that could strike northern Europe.
In Moscow, leading progressives have drafted a blueprint designed to push the nation closer to a free-market system.
The plan includes liberalizing the system of prices, breaking up industrial monopolies and putting unprofitable state-owned companies out of business. 

The U.S. signaled the Soviet Union that it is willing to discuss an offer by Foreign Minister Shevardnadze to curtail military bases in Europe. 

LAWSON RESIGNED as Britain's finance minister amid a policy dispute. 

In a letter to Prime Minister Thatcher, the chancellor of the exchequer said he was leaving his cabinet post because "the successful conduct of economic policy" wasn't possible so long as Sir Alan Walters remained as her economic adviser.
Sir Alan, however, also quit.
Thatcher named Foreign Secretary Major to succeed Lawson, and Home Secretary Hurd was appointed foreign minister. 

Sir Geoffrey Howe, deputy prime minister, said in the House of Commons that London's economic and monetary policies would remain "unchanged." 

An East German Politburo member met with opposition leaders in East Berlin for what were considered the first substantive talks on demands for Western freedoms.
Communist authorities urged pro-democracy activists to halt protests for internal changes, but about 100,000 people in Dresden ignored the appeal and staged a rally. 

South Africa has test-fired an intermediate-range ballistic missile that could carry nuclear warheads and was built with help from Israel, a U.S. official said.
The aide said Israel and South Africa also are cooperating on the development of a long-range missile.
Premier Shamir denied that Israel provided any technology to Pretoria. 

The White House has reached an accord with the Senate Intelligence Committee on new rules for covert operations to give Bush a freer hand to involve the U.S. in foreign coup plots.
The panel agreed to rescind Reagan-era curbs and give U.S. agents wide latitude to join coup planning, officials said. 

Bush extended most-favored-nation trade privileges to Hungary, saying it had honored its pledge of political and economic restructuring.
The president's move, which came three days after Budapest declared itself a democracy, made Hungary the first country to be freed from a 1974 law denying U.S. trade credits to most communist nations. 

House-Senate negotiators cleared a $3.18 billion anti-drug and anti-crime initiative, trimming domestic and defense spending to pay for it.
The package would put more emphasis on treatment, education and prevention programs favored by Democrats than Bush's smaller plan. 

San Francisco Bay area officials urged residents of tent cities in the agricultural community of Watsonville to move to shelters, expressing concern over health and safety dangers from unrefrigerated food and open cooking fires.
Tolls on bridges went back into effect, and traffic officers resumed issuing tickets in the region. 

The U.N. announced that its high commissioner for refugees, Jean-Pierre Hocke, resigned amid allegations of financial impropriety, mismanagement and favoritism to Western donor nations.
The 51-year-old Swiss's resignation is effective Wednesday. 

A China Airlines jetliner crashed into a mountainside in eastern Taiwan and all 54 people aboard, including at least one American, were believed killed.
The incident occurred shortly after the Taiwanese plane took off from Hualien, enroute to Taipei. 

Former HUD chief Pierce informed a House subcommittee that he will again refuse to answer its questions about mismanagement and political favoritism at the department he led for eight years under Reagan.
He refused to testify last month, invoking his right against self-incrimination. 

Bush is scheduled to travel to Costa Rica today to participate in the Central American nation's celebration of 100 years of democracy.
The president has ruled out any talks with Nicaragua's Ortega during the two-day gathering, where leaders of 18 nations are expected to discuss regional issues. 

Christian and Moslem forces traded artillery fire across Beirut's sectarian dividing line, the first major breach of an Arab-sponsored cease-fire that began about a month ago.
An Arab League envoy, meanwhile, traveled to Beirut from Damascus to help arrange a meeting of Lebanon's lawmakers to choose a new head of state. 

Pakistan's opposition introduced a noconfidence motion in Islamabad's Parliament.
Prime Minister Bhutto predicted that the move to oust her would be defeated.
The U.S., meanwhile, has told the opposition parties that any change in government must be accomplished without compromising the country's fledgling democracy. 

A Chinese government spokesman said martial law, entering its sixth month in Beijing, will be lifted soon.
The spokesman, quoted in the People's Daily newspaper, didn't offer a timetable.
Premier Li Peng declared martial law May 20 amid studentled pro-democracy protests. 

National Football League owners elected lawyer Paul Tagliabue as commissioner, succeeding Pete Rozelle, who announced his retirement in March after 30 years in the post.
The 48-year-old Tagliabue, an NFL counsel, is to serve a five-year term. 

