.START 

McDonald's Corp., under pressure by environmental groups to stop using polystyrene containers, announced a program here to foster recycling of the plastics at 450 of its New England restaurants. 

Environmentalists, however, attacked McDonald's program as a public relations ploy and the wrong way to address the nation's garbage crisis. 

Under the program, McDonald's restaurants will be equipped with recycling bins for plastic items and with posters encouraging customers to use them, the company said.
The plastic will be sent to a plant in Leominster, Mass., near Boston, which is owned by a joint venture recently formed by plastics makers.
It then will be processed into plastic pellets for use in making products such as trash cans, flower pots and food trays, but not food containers, McDonald's said. 

The program will reduce trash, help educate youngsters about recycling and "is a big step toward a better environment," asserted Shelby Yastrow, McDonald's senior vice president, environmental affairs. 

However, it will be a small step for McDonald's as a whole.
The program will include 4% of the company's 11,000 restaurants.
And because many customers won't participate, such as people who drive through, it is likely that less than 2% of the company's plastic containers will be recycled under the program.
McDonald's said it plans to expand the program when and if more plastic recycling plants are built near its restaurants. 

The plant in Leominster is the first of five planned by the National Polystyrene Recycling Co., the plastics-industry joint venture.
It was formed earlier this year by Dow Chemical Co., Mobil Corp. and six other concerns in response to concerns about growing amounts of non-biodegradable plastic trash.
Paul Keough , acting regional director for the Environmental Protection Agency in Boston, said, "We hope that other large companies follow McDonald's lead to undertake similar programs." But Amy Perry, a spokeswoman for the Massachusetts Public Interest Research Group, a Boston offshoot of Ralph Nader's lobbying outfits, argued that the program "just serves to legitimize increasing the use of throwaway plastics.
It would be far better for McDonald's to use durable goods {that could be reused for serving food}, instead of promoting the throwaway society." 

Last year, a network of environmental groups commenced a "McToxics Campaign" to pressure McDonald's to stop using polystyrene.
Among other things, the groups have urged consumers to mail used McDonald's plastic containers to its Oak Brook, Ill., headquarters. 

Concerns about plastic trash also have sparked legislative initiatives, such as one in Berkeley, Calif., to ban polystyrene products as of January.
Such laws are causing major headaches for companies like McDonald's, which increasingly must wrestle with different local rules across the nation. 

"Political pressure has been a factor" in the introduction of recycling programs by plastics makers and sellers, conceded Ken Harman, National Polystyrene's acting president and chairman, at the news conference, which was held in a McDonald's restaurant next to Boston's Children's Museum. 

Some of the pressure became evident during the news conference when a McDonald's customer startled company officials by blurting out, "Why do you produce so much trash in the first place?" The customer, Jeff Simpson, a visitor from London, later explained that he was vexed by all the plastic, paper and cardboard that came with the McDonald's breakfast he had just eaten.
The recycling program "is laudable," he said, "but why not use china plates?" 

