.START 

House and Senate negotiators approved a $3.18 billion anti-drug and anti-crime initiative, cutting domestic and defense spending 0.43% to pay for it. 

The package would put more emphasis on drug treatment, education and prevention programs favored by Democrats than President Bush's smaller proposal. 

It is part of a compromise $26 billion fiscal 1990 spending bill for the Transportation Department and highway and airport trust funds that the House is expected to ratify Tuesday. 

The negotiators made only small changes to the Senate-passed plan, which was the product of more than a week of negotiations between senators and Bush administration officials.
When added to previously approved programs, anti-drug spending authority for the current fiscal year would reach $8.8 billion, $900 million more than Mr. Bush requested and $3.1 billion more than in fiscal 1989, which ended Sept. 30. 

The initiative, which also contains funds for Mr. Bush's anti-crime package, would provide about $1 billion for federal prison construction, another approximately $1 billion for various federal treatment, education and prevention programs, and about $500 million for federal law-enforcement and drug-interdiction agencies. 

The measure approved yesterday doesn't include increased anti-drug funding that was already incorporated into other spending bills.
Of funding for anti-drug programs, nearly $2.1 billion in spending authority would be offset from other federal funds in order to avoid enlarging the budget deficit. 

More than $1.3 billion of the cuts would come from new defense budget authority, or $797 million in direct spending.
Foreign aid accounts would be reduced by $82 million in spending authority, or $42 million in direct spending.
Domestic spending authority would be cut by $678 million, or $401 million in outlays, although some accounts will have new anti-drug and anti-crime money added back to them. 

Budget authority measures the level of money appropriated by Congress to fund federal programs, and outlays represent the direct spending that results as these accounts are drawn down. 

The specific offsetting spending cuts are to be determined by the 13 House and 13 Senate appropriations subcommittees.
In some cases, those decisions have already been made and the results reflected in spending bills approved by the House and Senate. 

Separately, the Drug Enforcement Administration said it launched a new attack on domestic indoor marijuana cultivation.
The DEA said its agents yesterday executed 38 search warrants in coordinated raids in 42 states.
The targets were stores selling equipment used for growing marijuana indoors, the agency said. 

The DEA said late yesterday afternoon that it expected more than 100 people would be arrested in connection with the raids.
The agency estimated that marijuana production in the U.S. has more than doubled since 1986 to at least 4,350 tons in 1988.
That amount represents about 25% of the marijuana available for use in the country, the DEA said. 

