.START 

The growing crowd of Japanese investors buying up foreign companies aren't all strait-laced businessmen in dark suits. 

Yasumichi Morishita, whose art gallery last month became a major shareholder in Christies International PLC, the London auction house, is one man who doesn't fit the mold. 

In Japan, he's known in racy weekly magazines as the "King of Shady Money." If nothing else, the 57-year-old's past has its share of dents. 

Nearly 20 years ago, Mr. Morishita, founder and chairman of Aichi Corp., a finance company, received a 10-month suspended sentence from a Tokyo court for violating a money-lending law and an income tax law.
He was convicted of charging interest rates much higher than what the law permitted, and attempting to evade income taxes by using a double accounting system. 

He's had other brushes with the law.
He was arrested, though not indicted, on at least three other occasions in the '60s and '70s: for assault and unlawful confinement, for fraud and forgery of private documents, and for extortion. 

Christies says it has had no contact with Mr. Morishita since the stock purchase, but that it's happy to deal with him. "We like to make our own judgments" about Mr. Morishita, says Christopher Davidge, Christies' group managing director. "People have a different reputation country by country." 

Mr. Morishita is a leading figure among Japan's 38,000 "machikin," which lend to small companies, and "sarakin," which lend to individuals.
Many of these financiers lend freely, often without demanding collateral.
But the interest rates they charge are often near Japan's 54.75% legal limit, says Kenji Utsunomiya, a lawyer specializing in loan troubles. 

Aichi is a machikin, Mr. Utsunomiya says, and "one of the nasty ones." In describing that business in general, he says that when the client can't repay the loan, some machikin "clutch on like hyenas" and even take over the client's company.
Last month, Mr. Morishita's new gallery, Aska International Ltd., purchased 6.4% of Christies for #33 million ($53.3 million).
Acquired from Carisbrook Holdings U.K. Ltd., a company owned by Australian financier Robert Holmes a Court, the stake was apparently the first of its kind for Aska, an entity separate from Aichi.
And the acquisition, which made Aska one of Christies' top five shareholders, left many people wondering who this man was and what his intentions were. 

"We're an investor," Mr. Morishita says, sitting back in his purple gallery filled with some 20 Monets and Renoirs. "In the long run, the {stock} prices will go up." It's not clear whether Aska plans to buy more shares.
But Christies, Mr. Morishita insists, is happy to see him become a long-term stockholder. 

Mr. Morishita considers himself a connoisseur of art.
In 30 years of collecting impressionist and Japanese paintings, he has acquired 600 items, he says, enough to persuade him to start a museum next year.
He says he spent $300 million on his art business this year.
A week ago, his gallery racked up a $23 million tab at a Sotheby's auction in New York buying seven works, including a Picasso. 

"He makes snap judgments," says Kiyotaka Kori, the art gallery's manager and Mr. Morishita's secretary for more than seven years. 

Mr. Morishita's main business certainly appears to be thriving, although he won't disclose numbers.
According to Teikoku Data Bank Ltd., which tracks company earnings, Aichi's revenue rose 15% to 49.3 billion yen ($348.4 million) in the year ended February.
Revenue doubled from two years ago. 

That is, if the company reported results correctly.
The Asahi Shimbun, a Japanese daily, last month reported that Aichi revised its tax calculations after being challenged for allegedly failing to report all of its income to tax authorities over a two-year period.
The Tokyo Regional Taxation Office declines to comment, and Mr. Kori, the tycoon's secretary, says the problem simply resulted from a difference of opinion over what was considered income. 

The small, wiry Mr. Morishita comes across as an outspoken man of the world.
Stretching his arms in his silky white shirt and squeaking his black shoes, he lectures a visitor about the way to sell American real estate and boasts about his friendship with Margaret Thatcher's son. 

But when asked what exactly he does in business, he immediately takes offense. "Are you stupid?" he snaps. "You should know what questions to ask to get people to answer." 

Not many people know the details of Mr. Morishita's business, but it's a source of rumors about shady dealings.
When a small company goes belly-up, for instance, the gossipy weekly magazines are often quick to link the demise with Aichi.
Mr. Morishita scoffs at those stories, as well as the ones connecting him to the Japanese mob.
He says he has never even dined with gangsters. 

The seventh child of a store owner in Aichi prefecture, Mr. Morishita started out in the textile business.
From there, he set up his finance company and rapidly expanded from lending to investment in real estate to building golf courses.
He spends most weekends flying his helicopter to one of his nine courses, he says, two of which were designed by Jack Nicklaus.
He also owns courses in the U.S. and France. 

The gruff financier recently started socializing in upper-class circles.
Although he says he wasn't keen on going, last year he attended a New York gala where his daughter made her debut.
He also leads an opulent life style.
Even in Denenchofu, one of Tokyo's richest neighborhoods, Mr. Morishita's splashy brick manor -- one of some 10 houses he owns -- outshines the neighbors'.
A lavish white portico with a stained-glass window towers over the brick wall surrounding his property. 

Although Mr. Morishita says little about his business, he offers one rule to success: Never gamble too far. "I quit after one try, whether I win or lose," he says. "I'm done in two minutes." 

Mr. Morishita says he intends to expand his business to many other areas at home and abroad.
He'll be there wherever there's money to be made, laughs Mr. Kori, the secretary. "Who knows," he says, "if he heard that soybeans make money today, he might be flying out to Chicago tomorrow." 

