.START 

PaineWebber Group Inc. ordered a major pullback from program trading amid mounting pressure on Wall Street from some of its biggest investors. 

Other big brokerage firms also showed signs of retreating from controversial computer-assisted trading, which has become a liability for Wall Street after this month's 190-point, Friday-the-13th plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. 

Yesterday, Goldman, Sachs & Co. said it will campaign for significant curbs on the most common form of program trading -- stock-index arbitrage.
Also, other firms including American Express Co. 's Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. unit and Oppenheimer & Co. -- are debating whether to follow PaineWebber's lead and pull back from program trading. 

And Sears, Roebuck & Co. 's Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. unit, which used to be the 10th-biggest program trader on the New York Stock Exchange, said it is sending a program-bashing letter to more than two million clients over the next month, among other actions that may include a nationwide advertising campaign. 

"Program trading is simply an idea whose time has passed," said Dean Witter Chairman Philip J. Purcell. 

Program trading, which last month accounted for a record 13.8% of New York Stock Exchange volume, refers to a variety of computer-assisted trading of large amounts of stocks, stock-index futures and options.
Much of the trading is geared to short-term gains caused by brief price swings in volatile markets. 

Wall Street pulled back briefly from program trading after the October 1987 stock crash.
But then it charged back in, emboldened by post-crash studies that exonerated program trading from causing the crash (though not from causing big price swings).
And now it's reeling from a renewed outcry -- this time not only from small individual investors, but from major institutions that control big trading commissions. 

The criticism came to a head Tuesday when Kemper Corp., a big insurance and financial-services firm, cut off four Wall Street firms that engage in program trading -- Oppenheimer, General Electric Co. 's Kidder, Peabody & Co., Morgan Stanley & Co. and Bear, Stearns & Co. -- from getting any more of Kemper's stock-trading business. 

Other big investors are following Kemper's lead.
Yesterday, another institutional investor -- Keystone Group Inc., a Boston mutual-fund company -- said it will boycott firms that engage in index arbitrage.
The firm manages $2.5 billion in stock mutual funds. 

"These firms, by using proprietary index-arbitrage trading techniques, have been competing with their own customers," said Albert H. Elfner III, president of Keystone. "Their actions can hurt long-term, fundamentally oriented investors, and have undermined public trust in the fairness of the markets." 

Another institutional investor, Penn Mutual Life Insurance Co., said it might join Kemper in avoiding program-trading brokerage firms.
Such companies as Keystone, Kemper and Penn Mutual are dependent on business from small investors, who have been peppering them with complaints about program trading and have retreated from the financial markets since the 1987 crash. 

"We haven't decided to blacklist any firms.
But there's a chance we might," said David Wilson, head of Penn Mutual's $100 million stock portfolio. "We are very upset about what has happened to the stock market.
Program trading is almost like sitting on a calm beach and have a tidal wave hit you." 

Penn Mutual owns the regional brokerage firm Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. in Philadelphia.
Yesterday, several officials from Janney visited the New York Stock Exchange to lobby against program trading.
The firm's executive committee is considering drafting an anti-program-trading letter to its clients and to Congress. 

Donald B. Marron, PaineWebber chairman and chief executive officer, said the firm decided after the close of trading yesterday that it would stop doing index arbitrage for clients.
It already had ceased that form of trading for its own account. 

"It seems clear to us that index arbitrage is a big contributor to {the market's} volatility and it's reducing confidence in the market for institutional and retail clients," Mr. Marron said.
He said index arbitrage is "clearly, purely a speculative, hedging arbitrage strategy" that is "contributing to excess volatility." 

PaineWebber, the fifth-biggest program trader on the Big Board so far this year, will continue to engage in other forms of program trading besides index arbitrage, and indeed is Wall Street's foremost practitioner of non-arbitrage forms of program trading in terms of volume.
But Mr. Marron said these other forms of program trading, such as using computers to buy or sell a range of stocks but not stock futures, help bring "liquidity" to the market. 

Goldman, which doesn't do index arbitrage for itself but does for customers, is concerned about the fallout. "Our corporate, institutional and individual clients are concerned about what they perceive to be excessive volatility," said Robert E. Mnuchin, senior partner in charge of Goldman's equity trading. "We share their concern.
Consequently, we will recommend {to regulators} significant curbs on electronic access for waves of stocks which add volatility to the markets." He declined to comment further. 

Shearson, the 11th-biggest program trader, also doesn't do index arbitrage for itself.
Yet some officials at a regular management meeting Wednesday night urged the firm's leaders to pull out of the practice completely, to appease small investors. "The question was: Do we get mileage out of not doing it for clients?" said a Shearson official.
But so far, "the answer is no." 

Oppenheimer, a relatively minor program trader, is also reviewing its index-arbitrage operation.
Not only was it stung by Kemper's boycott, but it suffered an approximate $2.5 million index-trading loss during the Friday-the-13th plunge.
An Oppenheimer spokesman said index chief David Liptak had left the firm and wouldn't be replaced.
For the time being, James Wiess, an associate of Mr. Liptak's, "is now our index arbitrager," said the spokesman. 

The program-trading debate has caused splits even within some Wall Street brokerage firms. 

At Kidder Peabody, for example, the firm's leaders staunchly defend its aggressive use of index arbitrage for both Kidder's own account and for customers.
Kidder is the most active index arbitrager on the Big Board so far this year, trading about two million shares a day in the strategy. 

However, Kidder's 1,400 brokers aren't so sure about index arbitrage.
Said Charles V. Sheehan, Kidder's managing director in charge of retail business: "To try to talk to {stockbrokers} about the virtues of program trading is like trying to talk about the virtues of nuclear power to the Audubon Society." He conceded "there is a little bit of a conflict there" between Kidder's active program trading and its wooing of individual investors. 

There's a similar split at Merrill Lynch & Co., the Big Board's 3rd-biggest program-trading firm.
Although a Merrill spokesman stressed the firm does program trading only for clients -- "These are our clients and we have a responsibility to them" -- the argument doesn't go over on the firm's front lines.
Program trading is "scaring small investors away," said Michael Keyes, a Merrill broker in Ogden, Utah. 

The New York Stock Exchange insists it remains sympathetic to the individual investor.
Richard Grasso, Big Board president, said "it's too early to reflect on the comments" made this week by Kemper and the other program-bashing firms.
But, "we value our relationships with those who use the marketplace and are certainly sensitive to their needs and desires." 

When Kemper cut off four program-trading Wall Street firms from getting any of the big insurance and financial company's trading business, it complained that the Big Board has "vested interests" in its big member securities firms that engage in program trading. 

Christopher J. Chipello in Boston contributed to this article. 

Average monthly program trading volume for 1989 through September, in millions of shares 

Source: New York Stock Exchange 

