.START 

One year after hitting the auction block, RJR Nabisco Inc. resembles a runner in a long-distance race: The first mile has been almost flawless, but the pace may be difficult to maintain. 

Under buyer Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., which acquired the food and tobacco giant for $25 billion in February, RJR has kept pace with an ambitious schedule to pare its massive debt load.
But events beyond the company's control -- namely the skittish bond markets -- could have a big effect on the buy-out's profitability.
And rumors resurfaced yesterday that RJR's planned $1.48 billion sale of its Del Monte canned foods unit might fall through. 

If the Del Monte deal does hit a snag, it would be the first setback in an otherwise successful year.
Since February, RJR has been a study in perpetual motion.
It has moved its headquarters here from Atlanta, shed about 2,000 employees, sold businesses accounting for nearly a quarter of its $17 billion revenue base, and kicked what is called the "loading" habit, the practice of shipping distributors billions of cigarettes that stuff inventories but are never consumed. 

So far, history's biggest leveraged buy-out looks good from a financial standpoint.
In the first six months this year, RJR's operating profit soared 21% from the year-earlier period.
The results have led analysts to predict that the company's 1989 cash flow will be more than 20% ahead of the debt-coverage ratio required by RJR's banks. 

"We're acting like we're not an LBO company," said a beaming Louis Gerstner Jr., RJR's chairman and chief executive officer. 

But there are clouds on the horizon.
Much of KKR's financing for the RJR buy-out is with so-called payment-in-kind debt, notes that accumulate interest in more notes and don't require cash payments for several years.
Although RJR is having no trouble meeting cash-interest payments, it is too early to tell just how onerous the high-interest PIK notes will be once they come due. 

Moreover, asset sales, which have gone smoothly so far, could hit some hurdles.
Yesterday, prices of RJR's high-yield junk bonds fell on rumors of problems with the Del Monte deal.
Since Oct. 4, the price of RJR's junior bonds has fallen by about 14%. 

"Everything had gone well until the junk market went into disarray," said David Goldman, an analyst with Nomura Securities International Inc. "But from this point forward, I think the jury is definitely out." 

In some respects, the deal is right on track.
RJR's operating profit from tobacco, bolstered by strong overseas sales and manufacturing improvements, jumped 17% in the first six months.
The tobacco business does have some long-term problems.
Its brands are battered by Philip Morris Cos., and it is still unclear whether KKR will be able to afford the major overhaul to turn that business around. 

In the short term, however, the tobacco unit will continue to throw off more cash because of an estimated $500 million in cost cuts. 

Meanwhile, RJR's food business is surpassing almost everybody's expectations.
RJR operating income from food soared 31% in the six months, paced by 40% growth at its Nabisco Brands unit. 

Nabisco has cut costs aggressively, according to John Greeniaus, the unit's chief executive.
Savings have come from firing some high-paid research engineers, ending peripheral marketing activities such as race-car promotions and deferring plant-modernization plans.
Mr. Greeniaus also says Nabisco, following the lead of competitors, has been "relatively aggressive" in raising prices. 

But the big story at Nabisco this year is new products.
The unit's Teddy Grahams snack food has surged to become the industry's third-selling cookie in less than a year on the market, behind Nabisco's own Oreos and Chips Ahoy! brands.
Mr. Greeniaus put Teddy Grahams' first-year sales at just under $150 million, which he called "unprecedented." Last month, Nabisco brought out a dozen more new products. 

Next year, Mr. Greeniaus said, Nabisco's operating income should climb 15% -- down from the expected 40% growth this year but above the 10% level considered strong in the industry. 

RJR's asset sales will be on schedule, too -- if the Del Monte deal is successful.
In June, RJR got $2.5 billion for its European food units, which it used, along with about $200 million of other proceeds, to pay down about $2 billion of a $6 billion bridge loan.
RJR owes another $3 billion on that loan by February.
It expects to pay that with roughly $1 billion in sales of assorted small assets (probably including its 20% stake in ESPN, its Butterfinger and Baby Ruth candy bar brands, and its breakfast cereals unit) and $2 billion from the two-part sale of most of Del Monte.
A group led by Merrill Lynch & Co. agreed to acquire Del Monte last month, but the agreement is contingent on the securities firm's ability to finance about $350 million of the purchase price, either by selling junk bonds or making a bridge loan. 

The Del Monte purchase is scheduled to close in late December.
If it doesn't go through, that could force KKR to adjust the terms of the sale or to sell other assets, including RJR's food units in Latin America and New Zealand, the hot-cereals division, or even the Planter's LifeSavers unit, to meet the bank debt pay-down time-table. 

Neither Merrill, RJR nor KKR would comment yesterday on the deal. 

Several people familiar with the agreement said Merrill hasn't told RJR of any decision not to proceed with the purchase.
By next August, RJR must pay the last $1 billion of the bridge loan, with half that amount required to come from more asset sales. 

Predictably, RJR is taking advantage of its improving balance sheet to refinance some of its most expensive debt.
Karl von der Heyden, chief financial officer, said he is talking with bankers about refinancing between $2.5 billion and $3 billion of RJR loans at lower interest rates, possibly securing the refinanced debt with some of RJR's assets. 

"Conceptually, the longer we wait, the better our credit gets," said Mr. von der Heyden. "There would have to be some cataclysmic event for us not to bring our interest rate down." 

But once the bridge loan is paid off, the company will still owe some $19 billion in various types of debt.
And although the company apparently is meeting its cash-interest payments with ease, the clock is ticking on its non-cash notes -- to the tune of about $1.4 billion of accrued interest this year, with the amounts expected to rise to about $2.3 billion in 1993. 

A pivotal test will come in the next 18 months, according to bankers and money managers familiar with the buy-out.
Some time before April 1991, RJR must fix the interest rates on $5.8 billion worth of PIK bonds so the notes trade at par, in accordance with the bonds' terms.
That means if the notes continue trading below their $100 par value -- they are now trading below $80 (excluding accrued interest) -- RJR must boost the bonds' interest rates as high as necessary to drive their market price to $100.
That could require fixing the interest rate as high as 20%, bankers say, especially if the junk-bond market remains weak or deteriorates further. 

If RJR does have to raise rates significantly on the PIK debt, it won't cost the company cash for several years.
The bonds will continue to accrue interest in paper until the mid-1990s to late 1990s.
But it could erode the deal's profitability.
For example, a large, accruing debt to bondholders would diminish RJR's value in an initial public offering of stock. 

As the transaction was originally structured, about one-third of the PIK debt is due to convert into a 25% stake of RJR equity in 1993, unless 90% of the bond holders decide against conversion.
The key factor in the bond holders' decision will undoubtedly be whether the PIK notes that they are holding are more valuable than a 25% equity stake.
And that, of course, will depend on just how high RJR is forced to fix the interest rate to get the bonds trading up to par. 

Moreover, the $4 billion of PIK debt that isn't convertible into equity could be a big drain on returns if the bonds' interest rates have to be fixed higher. 

"The higher the reset, the greater the share of the return on equity will accrue to bondholders as opposed to equity holders," said Robert Long, a bond analyst with First Boston Corp. 

RJR's executives say they aren't concerned about the troubled junk-bond market yet. "We certainly wouldn't want to reset those bonds today," said Mr. von der Heyden. "If the markets don't recover, it will be costly.
But we have until April 28, 1991, to do it." 

"I really don't worry about what happens in the bond market from day to day, or even week to week," added Mr. Gerstner, RJR's chairman. "I think our paper has been well received.
I'm not concerned." 

Randall Smith contributed to this article. 

