.START 

If bluebloods won't pay high prices for racehorses anymore, who will? 

Breeders are betting on the common folk. 

The Thoroughbred Owners and Breeders Association, a Lexington, Ky.-based trade group, has launched "seminars" for "potential investors" at race tracks around the country.
The group, which has held half a dozen seminars so far, also is considering promotional videos and perhaps a pitch to Wall Street investment bankers. 

"People in this business have been insulated," says Josh Pons, a horse breeder from Bel Air, Md. "But the real future of this game is in a number of people owning a few horses." 

At the Laurel race track, the breeders are romancing people like Tim Hulings, a beer packaging plant worker.
Right now, Mr. Hulings is waving his racing program, cheering for Karnak on the Nile, a sleek thoroughbred galloping down the home stretch. 

Mr. Hulings gloats that he sold all his stocks a week before the market plummeted 190 points on Oct. 13, and he is using the money to help buy a 45-acre horse farm. "Just imagine how exciting that would be if that's your horse," he says. 

But experts caution that this isn't a game for anyone with a weak stomach or wallet. "It's a big-risk business," warns Charles C. Mihalek, a Lexington attorney and former Kentucky state securities commissioner. "You have to go into it firmly believing that it's the kind of investment where you can lose everything." 

And many have done just that.
Consider Spendthrift Farm, a prominent Lexington horse farm that went public in 1983 but hit hard times and filed for bankruptcy-court protection last year.
A group of investors recently bought the remaining assets of Spendthrift, hoping to rebuild it. 

Other investors have lost millions in partnerships that bought thoroughbred racehorses or stallion breeding rights.
One big problem has been the thoroughbred racehorse market.
From 1974 to 1984, prices for the best yearlings at the summer sales rose 918% to an average of $544,681.
Since then, prices have slumped, to an average of $395,374 this summer.
But that's for the best horses, with most selling for much less -- as little as $100 for some pedestrian thoroughbreds.
Even while they move outside their traditional tony circle, racehorse owners still try to capitalize on the elan of the sport.
Glossy brochures circulated at racetracks gush about the limelight of the winner's circle and high-society schmoozing.
One handout promises: "Pedigrees, parties, post times, parimutuels and pageantry." 

"It's just a matter of marketing and promoting ourselves," says Headley Bell, a fifth-generation horse breeder from Lexington. 

Maybe it's not that simple.
For starters, racehorse buyers have to remember the basic problem of such ventures: These beasts don't come with warranties.
And for every champion, there are plenty of nags.
Katherine Voss, a veteran trainer at the Laurel, Md., track, offers neophytes a sobering tour of a horse barn, noting that only three of about a dozen horses have won sizable purses. 

One brown two-year-old filly was wheezing from a cold, while another had splints on its legs, keeping both animals from the racetrack. "You can see the highs and lows of the business all under one roof," she tells the group. "There aren't too many winners." 

Perhaps the biggest hurdle owners face is convincing newcomers that this is a reputable business.
Some badly managed partnerships have burned investors, sometimes after they received advice from industry "consultants." So owners have developed a "code of ethics," outlining rules for consultants and agents, and disclosure of fees and any conflicts of interest. 

But some are skeptical of the code's effectiveness. "The industry is based on individual honesty," says Cap Hershey, a Lexington horse farmer and one of the investors who bought Spendthrift. 

Despite the drop in prices for thoroughbreds, owning one still isn't cheap.
At the low end, investors can spend $15,000 or more to own a racehorse in partnership with others.
At a yearling sale, a buyer can go solo and get a horse for a few thousand dollars.
But that means paying the horse's maintenance; on average, it costs $25,000 a year to raise a horse. 

For those looking for something between a minority stake and total ownership, the owners' group is considering a special sale where established horse breeders would sell a 50% stake in horses to newcomers. 

