.START 

DISASTER STATES aren't jumping to raise taxes for relief and recovery. 

Not yet, anyway.
Just after Hurricane Hugo battered South Carolina, some officials talked of perhaps adding a penny to the state gasoline tax or raising property taxes.
Gov. Campbell responded, "They're mentioning rope when there's been a hanging in the family." A spokesman says the governor believes he can avoid increases by relying on federal aid and shifting funds in state programs.
Still, Hugo's impact may revive unsuccessful proposals to give local governments authority to levy sales taxes. 

A spokesman for North Carolina Gov. Martin says Hugo hasn't prompted proposals for state or local increases.
California, where earthquake damage may top $5 billion, plans a special legislative session.
Property-tax relief is likely.
Legislators are talking about temporary rises in sales or gasoline taxes, although Gov. Deukmejian says they should be a last resort.
Needs aren't clear, and the state constitution makes increasing taxes and spending very difficult. 

But some legislators think the time may be ripe to revise the constitution. 

THE IRS WILL PAY if its error burdens you with bank charges. 

Policy statement P-5-39 sets out terms.
As a result of an erroneous IRS levy on a bank account, a taxpayer may incur administrative and overdraft charges.
If the IRS admits its error and the charges have been paid, it will reimburse a taxpayer who hasn't refused to give timely answers to IRS inquiries or hasn't contributed to continuing or compounding the error.
The IRS recently amended the policy to cover stop-payment charges for checks lost by the IRS. 

If the IRS asks for and gets a replacement for a check that it concedes it lost in processing, it will reimburse the taxpayer for the stop-payment charge on the original.
Reimbursement claims must be filed with the IRS district or service-center director within a year after the expense accrues.
If the IRS seeks late-payment interest because of the lost check, you should request interest abatement, publisher Prentice Hall notes. 

JUST FIVE ACRES MORE are all we need to feel really at home, they say. 

A couple we'll call the Blandings spent nearly $800,000 on a 15-acre plot and main home and have an old $175,000 mortgage exempt from the new limit on mortgage-interest deductions.
They plan to expand the home site by buying five adjoining acres for $200,000, borrowed against a first mortgage on the five acres and also collateralized by the 15 acres.
Their debt will be well under the $1 million limit -- on borrowing to acquire, build, or improve a home -- that qualifies for mortgage-interest deductions. 

As you can guess, the Blandings want to deduct home-mortgage interest on the $200,000 loan.
But, IRS private ruling 8940061 notes, no rule or court case bears directly on the issue of adding land to a principal residence.
So the IRS has drawn a rationale from the sale of a home site split in two and sold in different years to the same buyer; a court let the seller in that old case treat this as the sale of one residence. 

Thus, the IRS says, the Blandings' $200,000 loan is home-acquisition debt, and interest on it is fully deductible. 

EARTHQUAKE VICTIMS facing imminent filing and payment deadlines will get extensions and penalty waivers like those provided for Hugo's victims; IRS Notice 89108 has details.
Notice 89-107 offers added relief for hurricane-hit concerns that must file pension and benefit-plan returns. 

REPORTS OF PAYMENTS to independent contractors for services must be filed by businesses, but don't bet that contractors' unreported income will be detected that way.
The General Accounting Office estimates that 50% of IRS audits don't spot companies that fail to file the reports. 

UH HUH: A claim by Peter Testa of New York that a stranger paid him $500 to go into a bank and change $44,400 in small bills into large bills "is unconvincing," the Tax Court found.
It held that Testa is taxable on $44,400 of unreported income. 

WHY BE A MIDDLEMAN for charitable gifts? a retiree asks. 

A retired electrical engineer we'll call Ben works part-time as a consultant, but he doesn't want to earn so much that Social Security reduces his benefits.
So he has arranged for a university foundation to set up a scholarship fund for undergraduate engineering students.
He plans to tell clients to pay certain fees directly to the foundation instead of to him; he would omit those fees from income reported on his return.
So he asked the IRS if the plan would work. 

Well, notes IRS private ruling 8934014, "a fundamental principle" is that income must be taxed to whoever earns it.
The rule goes back at least as far as a 1930 Supreme Court decision, Robert Willens of Shearson Lehman Hutton says.
If you assign your income to another, you still have controlled its disposition and enjoyed the fruits of your labor, even if indirectly. 

Ben earns any fees sent directly to charity and is taxable on them, the IRS says; of course, he also may take a charitable deduction for them. 

BRIEFS: Ways and Means veteran Gephardt (D., Mo.) moves to the House Budget Committee; Rep. Cardin (D., Md.) replaces him. . . . Seattle's license fees for adult peep shows vary from those for other coin-operated amusements without serving a substantial government interest and are unconstitutional, the ninth-circuit appeals court holds for Acorn Investments Inc. 

