.START 

Mobil Corp. is preparing to slash the size of its work force in the U.S., possibly as soon as next month, say individuals familiar with the company's strategy. 

The size of the cuts isn't known, but they'll be centered in the exploration and production division, which is responsible for locating oil reserves, drilling wells and pumping crude oil and natural gas. 

Employees haven't yet been notified.
Sources said that meetings to discuss the staff reductions have been scheduled for Friday at Mobil offices in New Orleans and Denver. 

This would be a second round of cuts by Mobil, which along with other oil producers and refiners reduced its work force by 15% to 20% during the mid-1980s as part of an industrywide shakeout.
Mobil's latest move could signal the beginning of further reductions by other oil companies in their domestic oil-producing operations. 

In yesterday's third-quarter earnings report, the company alluded to a $40 million provision for restructuring costs involving U.S. exploration and production operations.
The report says that "the restructuring will take place over a two-year period and will principally involve the transfer and termination of employees in our U.S. operations." 

A company spokesman, reached at his home last night, would only say that there will be a public announcement of the reduction program by the end of the week. 

Most oil companies, including Mobil, have been reporting lower third-quarter earnings, largely as a result of lower earnings from chemicals as well as refining and marketing businesses. 

Individuals familiar with Mobil's strategy say that Mobil is reducing its U.S. work force because of declining U.S. output.
Yesterday, Mobil said domestic exploration and production operations had a $16 million loss in the third quarter, while comparable foreign operations earned $234 million. 

Industrywide, oil production in this country fell by 500,000 barrels a day to 7.7 million barrels in the first eight months of this year.
Daily output is expected to decline by at least another 500,000 barrels next year. 

Some Mobil executives were dismayed that a reference to the cutbacks was included in the earnings report before workers were notified.
One Mobil executive said that the $40 million charge related to the action indicates "a substantial" number of people will be involved.
Some will likely be offered severance packages while others will be transferred to overseas operations. 

