.START 

Medieval philosophers used to hold the sensible belief that it was more perfect to exist than not to exist, and that to exist as a matter of necessity was most perfect of all.
Now, only God exists as a matter of absolute necessity; it is built into His nature.
But since the time of Darwin, we humans could at least claim a sort of natural necessity for the existence of our species.
Aren't we, after all, the inevitable culmination of that stately pageant called evolution?
If mutation and natural selection slowly but surely give rise to more and more advanced forms of life, then it was only a matter of eons before splendid beings endowed with reason, self-awareness and taste shimmered onto the scene. 

Now along comes Stephen Jay Gould to dash this flattering illusion.
His credentials are excellent for the task.
Star lecturer at Harvard, author of numerous popular books on science, and scourge of the creationist lobby, Mr. Gould is perhaps the world's most eminent evolutionary theorist.
Yet he puts quite a twist on the old story handed down from Darwin.
For him, natural history is anything but a gradual, predictable march from primordial slime to human consciousness; it is a careening, chaotic affair in which the emergence of a featherless biped was a one-in-a-million shot. 

In "Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History" (Norton, 326 pages, $19.95), Mr. Gould makes his case for "the awesome improbability of human evolution." The argument turns on the discovery in 1909 of an amazing fossil quarry high in the Canadian Rockies called the Burgess Shale.
Here, in an area smaller than a city block, lay buried traces of countless weird creatures that had frolicked more than 500 million years ago -- creatures whose anatomical variety far exceeded what can be found in all the world's oceans today. 

Such an embarrassment of riches was inconceivable to the man who discovered the Burgess Shale, one Charles Doolittle Walcott.
The received Darwinian wisdom of the day said that animals living so long ago must be simple in design, limited in scope and ancestral to contemporary species.
Accordingly, the hidebound traditionalist reconstructed hypothetical organisms from the Burgess fossils in such a way that they could be shoehorned into familiar categories. 

It was not until the early 1970s that Cambridge Prof. Harry Whittington and two sharp graduate students began to publish a reinterpretation of the Burgess Shale.
By making clever inferences about how the squashed and distorted fossil remains corresponded to three-dimensional structures, this trio was able to piece together a series of wondrous beasties quite unlike anything currently on the planet.
One was so fantastic in appearance, it was dubbed Hallucigenia. 

Would that Mr. Gould's minute descriptions of these creatures was always so colorful.
A good deal of the book is boring, particularly the endless allusions to high and pop culture and the frequent jokes festooning the text.
These turns do not provide sufficient relief from sentences like, "Most modern chelicerates have six uniramous appendages on the prosoma." 

Interest picks up, though, when Mr. Gould gets around to discussing the meaning of the Burgess oddities for the theory of evolution.
Not long after the appearance of life, evidently, there was an explosive proliferation in the number of animal designs seen on the earth.
The vast majority of them, however, were wiped out by a succession of environmental upheavals that were too sudden and catastrophic for the normal rules of natural selection to operate.
Consequently, the winnowing process was like a lottery "in which each group {held} a ticket unrelated to its anatomical virtues." So much for survival of the fittest. 

So much, too, for the notion that we humans triumphed in the Darwinian struggle by evolving big brains.
Our mammalian forerunners lucked out through the extraterrestrial impact that did in the dinosaurs because they were small, not smart.
If anyone has difficulty imagining a world in which history went merrily on without us, Mr. Gould sketches several.
In one, birds are the dominant carnivores; in another the seas abound with "little penises." 

Back when the Burgess fauna were flourishing, it seems, human evolutionary hopes hung on the survival of a little worm with a backbone called Pikaia.
Mr. Gould finds this oddly exhilarating; like an existentialist of old, he views our contingency as "a source of both freedom and consequent moral responsibility." I, by contrast, cannot help feeling that if some other curiosity from the Burgess Shale had survived instead, beings at once wiser and less boorish than Homo sapiens might have eventually gained earthly dominion.
But even if no conscious life had evolved here at all, the universe is a big place, and given the right conditions, sympathetic to creating some form of life.
Surely at some other cosmic address a Gouldoid creature would have risen out of the ooze to explain why, paleontologically speaking, "it is, indeed, a wonderful life." 

Mr. Holt is a columnist for the Literary Review in London. 

