.START 

Whether or not "great cases make bad-law" -- as Justice Holmes asserted -- who can doubt that when great confirmation hearings turn on the nominee's response to these great cases they make bad judicial history? 

Ethan Bronner's "Battle for Justice: How the Bork Nomination Shook America" (Norton, 399 pages, $22.50) is a spirited narrative of the nastiest of these hearings, done with journalistic verve, but with a flawed legal philosophy.
While the book amply justifies its subtitle, the title itself is dubious.
What shook America was not a battle for justice but for naked power, in which an army of judicial activists rolled over a judge they had demonized. 

In its basic structure and style the book is novelistic, with piquant character portrayal, hard-wire action and devious intrigue of the sort more likely to be encountered in a Washington docudrama than in a constitutional history. 

Mr. Bronner seems to believe that the hearings could have gone either way.
I doubt that.
Given Democratic frustration with the Reagan victories and Court appointments, the contingency plans in place, and Mr. Bork's paper trail of vulnerable writings, it was pretty clear that Judge Bork never stood much chance of being confirmed.
As Mr. Bronner himself says, the smell of "raw meat" was in the air. 

Perhaps because they won, Mr. Bork's attackers come through more vividly than his defenders.
Ralph Neas was the organizing genius, whipping a conglomerate of pressure groups into an irresistible attacking force.
Harvard's Laurence Tribe was the constitutional heavy, laying out legal strategies for the senators and witnesses to follow.
But it was Ted Kennedy who scored most effectively with his searing portrayal of "Robert Bork's America" -- the parade of imaginary horribles that would follow logically, he claimed, from the positions Mr. Bork had taken over the space of two decades.
Sen. Kennedy, never mind his dubious credentials for the moral high ground, emoted brilliantly. 

I add two others.
Republican Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania engaged the nominee in a verbal contest aimed at showing that Mr. Bork was willing to stretch the Constitution in one area (free speech) while remaining rigid in all the others.
It achieved a good media play, and enabled Sen. Specter and others to vote against Mr. Bork out of "conscience." Further ammunition came from left legal theorist Ronald Dworkin, who in the New York Review of Books painted a picture of a constitutional zombie willfully reading his personal prejudices into the Constitution, particularly in the area of "original intent." The charge of being "outside the mainstream" of legal thought gravely undercut Mr. Bork's scholarly standing, leaving him bleeding on the platform. 

The nomination still might have been salvaged if a number of Democratic moderates in the South and Southwest had broken party lines.
But Democratic Sen. Bennett Johnson of Louisiana reminded the little band that anti-Bork blacks and women could furnish the margin to punish them in their next Senate elections.
Demographics converged with "mainstream" and demonizing to seal Robert Bork's fate. 

The upshot?
Mr. Bork's opponents chose the battlefield, held it and kept it.
Yet with the smooth confirmation of Anthony Kennedy, an "80 percenter" only slightly less supportive of judicial restraint than Mr. Bork, the Democrats may have won the battle but lost the war. 

Another upshot, however, was the chilling message the Bork hearings sent into the judicial culture from which the Supreme Court draws its talent.
The word went forth to every law school that those with federal court ambitions must travel a safe constitutional journey, with no paper trail and no bite to their tongue or pen. 

Unfortunately, the author simply doesn't supply the philosophical frame to sustain his reportorial talents.
He has too readily swallowed the case for the activist law school culture.
Probing more deeply into the doctrine of "judicial restraint," he would have found a long history going back to the great decisions of Justice Holmes.
He would discover it also in Alexander Bickel, a subtle constitutional scholar, Mr. Bork's closest friend at Yale, whose influence on the judge goes well beyond Mr. Bronner's reporting. 

Still, the long view of Robert Bork as constitutional thinker must be a spotty one.
His strength lies in his majoritarian doctrine, which keeps the Court clear of transient group pressures and leaves most decisions in a democracy to elected legislatures and executives.
Unfortunately, Mr. Bork failed to distinguish between such pressures and the emergence of great issues critical to a society that must be settled judicially if it is to cohere. 

The question of segregated schools, in Brown vs. Board of Education, was such an issue.
In our time abortion has become another, best left to a line of Supreme Court decisions rather than to the chaos of 50 state legislatures.
A reflective and growing consensus of Americans clearly wishes to apply the right to privacy in contraceptive matters (decided in the Griswold case) to abortion as well.
One can understand Mr. Bork's fear that the new right to privacy will become intolerably stretched, though a Supreme Court composed of men and women with realism, guts and a sense of limits should be able to manage it.
What is certain is that if Americans allow another happening like the degrading Bork confirmation circus, it will be at their peril. 

Mr. Lerner is a writer and historian living in New York. 

