.START 

Could the collapse of I-880 have been prevented? 

That was the question structural engineers and California transportation officials were asking themselves yesterday as rescue workers began the gruesome task of trying to extract as many as 250 victims from beneath the concrete slabs of the double-deck Nimitz Freeway in Oakland that caved in during Tuesday's temblor. 

After touring the area, California Gov. George Deukmejian late yesterday called for an inquiry into the freeway's collapse, blaming the disaster on substandard construction, the Associated Press reported. 

The impact of the destruction of this 2.5-mile stretch of highway was tragically measured in lost lives.
But there are other long-term effects that raise serious questions about the ability of California's infrastructure to withstand a major temblor. 

It could easily be two years before the well-traveled artery that helps connect Oakland with San Francisco is reopened, and the cost to build a new stretch of highway could soar to more than $250 million, said Charles J. O'Connell, deputy district director in Los Angeles of the California Department of Transportation, nicknamed Caltrans.
Caltrans in Sacramento said total damage from the collapsed highway is estimated at around $500 million. 

The aftershocks of the highway tragedy are reverberating in Los Angeles as well, as local politicians spoke yesterday against plans to bring double-decking to Los Angeles freeways by 1994.
Caltrans plans to add a second deck for buses and car pools above the median of a 2.5-mile stretch of the Harbor Freeway just south of Los Angeles, near the Memorial Coliseum.
Los Angeles County Supervisor Kenneth Hahn yesterday vowed to fight the introduction of double-decking in the area. 

Caltrans abandoned double-decking in the early 1970s, following the 1971 Sylmar earthquake that destroyed freeway sections just north of Los Angeles, Mr. O'Connell explained.
That temblor measured 6.1 on the Richter scale; Tuesday's was 

So why even consider stacking freeways now? "We've run out of places to build freeways in L.A., and the only place to go is up," Mr. O'Connell said, although he acknowledges there are many obstacles, including cost.
But as for safety, he says double-deck freeways built today with the heavily reinforced concrete and thicker columns required after the Sylmar quake should withstand a calamitous temblor of 7.5 to 8 on the Richter scale. 

Reasons for the collapse of the Nimitz Freeway were sketchy yesterday.
But most structural engineers attributed the destruction to improper reinforcement of the columns that supported the decks, and the fact that the ground beneath the highway is largely landfill and can become unstable, or "liquefy," in a major quake. 

The two-story roadway, designed in the mid-1940s and completed in 1957, was supported by columns that apparently lacked the kind of steel reinforcement used in highways today.
While the pillars did have long metal bars running vertically through them for reinforcement, they apparently lacked an adequate number of metal "ties" that run horizontally through the column, said Leo Parker, a structural engineer in Los Angeles.
Caltrans today uses a variation of the design Mr. Parker describes, with spiraling steel rods inside. 

But in the case of the Nimitz Freeway, the lack of such support caused the core of the columns to crumble and buckle under the weight of the second deck, crushing motorists who were lined up in bumper-to-bumper rush-hour traffic on the lower deck nearly 15 feet below. 

Officials of the state agency didn't have any immediate explanation why the reinforcement didn't hold up. 

Caltrans reinforced the highway in 1977 as part of a $55 million statewide project, using steel cables to tie the decks of the freeway to the columns and prevent the structure from swaying in a quake.
Caltrans spokesman Jim Drago in Sacramento declined to identify the engineering firm that did the reinforcement work. 

Liability in the bridge and road collapses will revolve around whether government took "reasonable care" to build and maintain the structures, says John Messina, a Tacoma, Wash., personal-injury attorney who specializes in highway design and maintenance cases.
The firm brought in to strengthen the structure could be liable as well. 

The results of the quake certainly raise questions about whether reasonable care was taken, Mr. Messina says.
Given the seismic history of the Bay Area, "it seems to me that a 6.9 earthquake is a foreseeable event." 

Caltrans' Mr. Drago defended the agency's work on the Nimitz Freeway. "The work was done properly," he said. "Basically, we had a severe earthquake of significant duration and it was just something the structure couldn't withstand." 

Ironically, Caltrans this year began working on a second round of seismic reinforcements of freeways around the state, this time wrapping freeway columns in "steel blankets" to reinforce them.
But only bridges supported with single rows of columns were top priority, and the Nimitz Freeway, supported by double rows, was left out, Mr. Drago explained. "The reason is that the technology is such that we're not able to retrofit multi-column structures," he said. 

Charles McCoy in San Francisco and John R. Emshwiller in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 

