.START 

Within minutes after the stock market closed Friday, I called Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey, advised him that the Dow Jones Industrial Average had declined by 190 points late that afternoon, and cheerfully informed him that he and his fellow Democrats were to blame. 

They had dealt a major setback that afternoon to President Bush's capital-gains tax cut proposal, which had seemed in the bag after it passed the House overwhelmingly earlier in the month.
Sen. Bradley has it in his mind that such a tax cut would unravel the tax reform he helped engineer in 1986.
But he knows that as many as 20 of his fellow Democrats are disposed to vote for the cut, popular among their constituents. 

As a result, he took the lead in arguing that the cut should be blocked on procedural grounds.
He helped persuade 10 of these senators to support him and Majority Leader George Mitchell on these grounds.
The budget reconciliation had to be dealt with by the Oct. 15 deadline, and these Senate Democrats refused to agree to allow a vote to append capital gains to the budget bill, knowing it would pass. 

Denied a vote on substance, the GOP leadership in the Senate on Friday morning was confronted with a hard choice.
It could throw in the towel and hope to win on capital gains late this month, or it could follow the White House strategy, to veto reconciliation unless capital gains was appended. 

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has been in the forefront in supporting the Bush proposal.
It endorsed the White House strategy, believing it to be the surest way to victory.
At noon Friday, a senior White House official advised Richard Rahn, the Chamber's chief economist, that the White House would not agree to a budget reconciliation bill unless it had firm assurances that a vote on substance would be permitted in the Senate. 

Two hours later, the first word emerged on Capitol Hill that the administration had agreed to reconciliation with no such assurances from Senate Democrats.
Mr. Rahn was shocked, telephoning the office of Richard Darman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the administration's chief strategist on this issue.
He left a message accusing Mr. Darman of selling out.
It was the Senate Republicans, though, who had edged away from the veto strategy. 

The stock market reacted as Mr. Rahn did, crumbling as it absorbed the news that Mr. Darman's strategy had been abandoned.
The stock market, after all, represents the collective expectations about the value of the future income stream of the nation's capital stock, discounted to present value. 

Why should it be so surprising that a 30% cut in the capital-gains tax would have such an enormous impact on the value of the nation's capital stock?
The total value of privately held assets is easily more than $15 trillion.
The value traded on the exchanges is close to $3 trillion. 

If the tax on any gain to those assets was doubled, wouldn't the value fall to the owners of the assets?
Isn't it reasonable to assume that the asset you own would be worth more if the government suddenly announced that if you sold it, you would be able to keep 30% more of its gain than you previously believed?
Indeed, the stock market's steady advance this year tracked with President Bush's success in advancing his capital-gains proposal.
A 30% cut in this year's capital gains alone amounts to roughly $50 billion.
We're talking real money. 

When Richard Rahn advised the financial press that the market crash was caused by the setback to capital gains, he was generally ignored and mildly ridiculed.
Instead, the press corps readily accepted the notion that a snag in the takeover financing of United Airlines instantly knocked 7% off the value of the nation's capital stock and caused convulsions around the world.
Mr. Rahn was pointing out an elephant rumbling through Wall Street while conventional wisdom had fastened on the UAL flea. 

Why is this happening?
For one thing, quite a number of the leading spokesmen on Wall Street are not portfolio managers, who understand that the value of assets is greatly affected by how government taxes those assets.
They are economists and financial reporters who sympathize with the view that a capital-gains tax cut benefits the rich.
Yet they somehow think that Wall Street is indifferent to losing the tax cut that seemed so close Friday morning and is now problematic.
The market rebound Monday followed weekend assurances from Mr. Darman that the administration has other plans to win the cut, which is alive and well. 

Sen. Bradley's argument is that a capital-gains tax cut would be bad for the economy in the longer run.
It would inevitably lead to an increase in marginal income-tax rates in 1990, he thinks, when the White House is forced to ask for higher taxes to meet budget targets.
That is, with capital gains cut, the glue of the 1986 accord will be gone, and political realities will push up income-tax rates.
The counter-argument, which he has heard, is that if he and his fellow Democrats are successful in killing the president's proposal, the revenue gap will open up tremendously in 1990 because of the weakened economy.
In this atmosphere, there would be no serious consideration of tax increases.
If Sen. Bradley would permit a vote on capital gains, though, it would pass, Christmas retail sales would be strong instead of burdened by a falling stock market, the 1990 economy would be robust, and the revenue gains at every level of government, including New Jersey's, would be surprisingly high.
No tax increases would be necessary. 

The struggle over capital gains is the most important game in town.
In Washington and on Wall Street. 

Mr. Wanniski is president of Polyconomics Inc., of Morristown, N.J. 

