.START 

Sotheby's Inc., the world's biggest auction house, is taking a huge Wall Street-style risk on the outcome of the sale of art from the estate of John T. Dorrance Jr., the Campbell Soup Co. heir. 

The Financial Services division has guaranteed the Dorrance family that it will receive a minimum of $100 million for the collection, regardless of what the bids for the art works total, people close to the transaction say.
The collection, which includes two early Picassos, a van Gogh, a Monet, other paintings, furniture and porcelains, went on sale last night in the first of six auctions. 

What Sotheby's is doing closely resembles an underwriting by an investment bank.
A corporation that wants to sell stock or bonds goes to a Wall Street firm, which purchases the securities outright, accepting the financial risk of finding buyers.
If the investment bank can sell the securities at a higher price than it paid the issuer, it makes a profit. 

At the initial sale last night, for example -- the sale featuring the Impressionists masters -- bids totaled $116 million.
That was slightly above Sotheby's presale estimate of $111 million.
Normally, Sotheby's would have earned 20% of the total in commissions.
Instead, people familiar with the transaction said, the auction house opted to forgo that percentage in order to obtain the collection and in exchange for taking a bigger chunk of proceeds exceeding $100 million. 

Art dealers say that while auction houses occasionally guarantee the seller of a highly desirable work of art a minimum price, a financial commitment of this size is unprecedented. 

Diana D. Brooks, president of Sotheby's North America division, vehemently denies it offered the Dorrance heirs a money-back guarantee, calling such reports "inaccurate." Buried in the glossy hardbound catalog for the sale, however, appears the statement, "Sotheby's has an interest in the property in this catalog." 

Explains a Sotheby's spokeswoman, the statement "means exactly what it says.
We have some level of financial interest" in the collection. "We don't disclose specifics." 

Frank Mirabello, a lawyer for the Dorrance estate with the Philadelphia law firm of Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, declines to comment on the financial arrangements. 

Sotheby's made the $100 million guarantee to keep the Dorrance collection away from its archrival, auction house Christie's International PLC; Christie's has handled smaller sales for the Dorrance family over the years. 

When Christie's officials asked why the firm wasn't picked to sell the Dorrance collection, representatives of the Dorrance family "told us it was a question of financial considerations," said Michael Findlay, Christie's head of impressionist and modern paintings. 

Collectors who have made their money on Wall Street have become an increasingly important part of the art business and their money has helped fuel the art boom, but recently it appears Sotheby's has been returning the compliment. 

In November 1987, Sotheby's essentially offered a Wall Street-style "bridge loan" of about $27 million to Australian businessman Alan Bond to enable him to purchase Vincent van Gogh's "Irises" for $53.9 million.
It was the highest bid in history for a work of art.
But two weeks ago, Sotheby's said that it has the painting under lock and key because the loan had not been fully repaid. 

Sotheby's is offering such deals because it's an art sellers' market, at least where the best works are concerned, says Ralph Lerner, an attorney and author of the book "Art Law." "There seems to be a lot of art for sale, but there's more competition.
The competition gives the seller the ability to cut a better deal," he says. 

The Dorrance family will still receive a substantial portion of the auction proceeds above $100 million, people familiar with the transaction said.
But it's likely that Sotheby's will take a higher than usual commission, called an override, on the amount exceeding the guarantee. 

Sotheby's has been aggressively promoting the Dorrance sale.
At a news conference last May announcing plans for the auction, Sotheby's estimated its value in excess of $100 million.
More recently, Sotheby's has predicted the collection will fetch $140 million.
That's the highest estimate for a single collection in auction history. 

The decision to put the entire collection on the block stunned many, since Mr. Dorrance had served as chairman of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, and it had been assumed many of the works would be donated to the institution. 

At last night's sale, 13 of 44 works that sold were purchased by Aska International Gallery, the art-acquisition unit of Aichi Financial, a Japanese conglomerate that owns 7.5% of Christie's. 

Meanwhile, Sotheby's guarantee is raising eyebrows in the art world. "The consumer has to throw out the idea that the auction house is a disinterested middleman," says New York art dealer David Tunick.
While he adds that he has no problem with auction houses who sell works in which they have a financial interest, "It ought not to be hidden in some small print." 

In such situations, he says, the house "is going to put the best light on things." For example, an auction house's comments on the condition of a work of art that is up for sale should be looked at with "very open eyes," he says. 

"There's more and more of this cash-up-front going on at every level," says Bruce Miller, president of Art Funding Corp., an art lender.
Dealers and auction houses "know if they don't lay out a half a million for this, another one will; it's that competitive." 

In January, two small New York galleries, the Coe Kerr Gallery and Beadleston Fine Arts, snatched a major art collection owned by the Askin family away from rival auction-house bidders with an up-front payment of about $25 million. 

A Christie's spokeswoman said that while the auction house sometimes waives its seller's commission to attract art works -- it still gets a commission from the buyer -- Christie's won't offer financial guarantees because "Christie's believes its primary role is as an auction house, and therefore as an agent {for buyer and seller}, not as a bank." 

