.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

THE YOM KIPPUR WAR, WHEN EGYPT CRASHED into Israel on Oct. 6, 1973, the holiest day in the Jewish calendar, lasted barely a month.
But one far-afield effect is still with us. 

The Arab states, always bitterly resentful of U.S. support toward Israel, realized they held an irresistable weapon -- oil.
Early in October, six Arab nations in the Persian Gulf jacked up prices sharply.
On Oct. 22, led by Saudi Arabia, the world's largest exporter, they embargoed oil shipments to the U.S. and to the Netherlands, Israel's staunchest European ally. 

The timing was perfect.
The Arabs had tried embargos before.
In 1956, when Britain, France and Israel invaded Egypt to seize the Suez Canal, Arab producers cut off supplies to Europe.
Texas simply pumped harder. 

U.S. oil supplies, however, had peaked in 1970 and 1971 and by 1973 were declining.
Imports, then six million barrels a day, came primarily from Venezuela and Canada.
But Middle East supplies were growing in importance.
By 1973, the U.S. was bringing in two million barrels of Arab oil a day, more than 10% of the 17.3 million barrels consumed daily. 

Politics and economics conspired.
Japan and Europe, far more dependent on Mideast oil than the U.S., wouldn't offend the Arabs or trade off their precious supplies.
The U.S. did manage to supply the Dutch with oil by relabeling supplies; once oil is shipped, no one can tell its source. 

But car-happy Americans panicked, and so did the U.S. and other oil-consuming governments. "Shortage" and "crisis" became buzz words, although neither really applied.
The spot dislocations that showed up were largely the result of confusion (much of it in Washington), though that was cold comfort for drivers waiting in mile-long lines at the gas pumps. 

The embargo lasted only six months, but the price hikes became a fact of life.
What the Arabs started, inflation finished.
Once and for all, $5-a-barrel crude oil and 35-cents-a-gallon gasoline were history. 

