.START 

Dale Lang, who this week completed the acquisition of the publisher of Ms. and Sassy, is candid about the challenge he is taking on. 

Mr. Lang admits that Ms. is "in dire straits" and that Sassy needs big promotional dollars to keep it alive.
But the 57-year-old publisher has moved quickly and boldly to deal with the magazines' problems. 

Last Friday, he told the staff of Ms. that the magazine in January would begin publishing without advertising.
Mr. Lang will do away with expensive circulation drives, not to mention sales staff, and attempt to publish the 17-year-old magazine supported by circulation revenue alone. 

"Any fool can publish a money-losing magazine.
I want to publish one that succeeds," said Mr. Lang. "For Ms., it's time to publish for the reader, not the advertiser." 

As for Sassy, which competes directly with News Corp. 's Seventeen magazine, Mr. Lang says that in the next two years he will spend $6 million promoting and improving the magazine. 

Though Sassy has grown quickly since its debut in March 1988, it has been the target of conservative lobbyists and skittish advertisers who bristled at its frank editorial matter on teen-age problems. 

Mr. Lang said the former Australian owners of Sassy were "blind-sided by the Moral Majority. . . . Their reaction was to do nothing and ride it out." He said Sassy will keep its irreverent tone, but added, "We will keep a close watch on the editorial content of the magazine." 

Sassy already has recovered; circulation has quickly passed the 500,000 mark and advertising pages have stabilized this year at more than 300.
What's more, Mr. Lang says he has what all publishers wish for: a bona fide niche. "Seventeen is written more for mothers, not their daughters," said Mr. Lang. "But Sassy has a different spirit.
It gets more mail in a month than McCall's got in a year, and it's not from mothers.
I feel about Sassy like I did about Working Woman 10 years ago." Mr. Lang took on Ms. and Sassy with the acquisition of Matilda Publications Inc. by his newly formed Lang Communications.
Lang owns 70% of Matilda, while Citicorp owns the rest through its Citicorp Venture Capital Partners.
Two weeks ago, Citicorp and Mr. Lang pumped $800,000 into Matilda just to keep the doors open. 

Industry observers have congratulated Mr. Lang on what some call his "courageous" handling of Ms., but his track record in magazine publishing in general has gotten mixed reviews. 

Besides Ms. and Sassy, closely held Lang Communications includes Success, a magazine for entrepreneurs and small businesses, and Working Woman and Working Mother, two monthly magazines.
Working Woman, with circulation near one million, and Working Mother, with 625,000 circulation, are legitimate magazine success stories.
The magazine Success, however, was for years lackluster and unfocused.
Only recently has it been attractively redesigned and its editorial product improved.
Success is expected to gain at least because of the recent folding of rival Venture, another magazine for growing companies. 

Working Woman and Working Mother have operated as part of Working Woman/McCall's Group, a less-than-successful joint venture between Mr. Lang and Time Warner Inc.
The joint venture is being undone, with McCall's magazine being sold last summer to the New York Times Co. 's Magazine Group for about $80 million, and Time Warner agreeing to sell back its 50% interest in Working Woman and Working Mother to Mr. Lang. 

Executives at Time Inc. Magazine Co., a subsidiary of Time Warner, have said the joint venture with Mr. Lang wasn't a good one.
The venture, formed in 1986, was supposed to be Time's low-cost, safe entry into women's magazines.
Mr. Lang surprised Time soon after joining forces when he said he would negotiate rates individually with advertisers, a practice common in broadcasting but considered taboo by magazine publishers. 

In addition, McCall's put in a less than stellar performance.
Until a recent comeback, it saw steep losses in ad pages and circulation.
Time executives complained about the shoddy editorial quality, and in the end, one Time executive who asked not to be identified said, "Frankly, McCall's and the joint venture were an embarrassment." 

Mr. Lang feels that Time's priorities changed. "Their management changed right after {the venture was formed}, and I don't think they were comfortable getting into the competitive wars of women's service magazines." 

Today, Mr. Lang believes his magazines will offer what many women's magazines don't. "We write straight for women on their level," he said. "We don't have passive readers." Mr. Lang points out that even Success, in part, fits the company's image, since about 30% of its readership is female. 

Mr. Lang has named Carol Taber, 43, as group publisher of New York-based Lang Communications.
She will oversee Working Woman, Working Mother and Success magazines, and retain her post as publisher of Working Woman. 

The sale price of McCall's -- twice what Mr. Lang originally paid for it -- will finance Lang Communications' buy-back of Time Warner's 50% interest in Working Woman and Working Mother.
Mr. Lang says he isn't scouting new acquisitions, at least for now. "We would have to go outside to banks to get the money and I am not ready to do that," he said. "Besides, we have enough on our plate.
There is plenty of work to be done on what we have." 

