.START 

"The New Crowd" by Judith Ramsey Ehrlich and Barry J. Rehfeld (Little, Brown, 444 pages, $19.95), describes the displacing of the old "our crowd" Jewish Wall Street banking grandees by such new business barons as Saul Steinberg, Carl Icahn, Sanford Weill and Bruce Wasserstein.
Its many lively stories include the Gutfreund-Postel holiday cheer imbroglio.
These two New Crowd families lived in the same apartment building, with the Postel penthouse perched on top of the Gutfreund duplex.
The penthouse elevator started up from the Gutfreund landing, and Susan Gutfreund used to turn off its light, to give the impression that there was no higher floor.
Eventually, Mr. Postel broke his toe in the dark. 

Then the Gutfreunds determined to put up a 22-foot Christmas tree, weighing a quarter of a ton, to amaze their holiday guests.
For this, a crane needed to be mounted on the Postels' terrace.
The Postels did not give permission.
But the Gutfreund workers went ahead anyway, only to be captured "in flagrante" by Joan Postel, who called the police. 

Before the Gutfreunds finally left this unfriendly environment for a prodigious duplex on Fifth Avenue and an 18th-century mansion with a specially excavated $1 million garage in Paris, the Postels had obtained an injunction to prevent any future hoisting of trees, and in a neighborly spirit hit both the Gutfreunds and the building with a $35 million lawsuit.
Nothing less, it seemed, could console them for their traumas. 

Where had all the money come from?
The young John Gutfreund had been discovered by Billy Salomon of Salomon Bros. when he was still a bearded liberal, and put to work as a trader, and then as a rough-and-tumble syndicator. " `Get off your . . .,' he would bellow," say the authors.
Rising in the firm, he became powerful and bland, though his new wife, Susan, made him shine in the gossip columns with her profligate spending habits and flamboyant frocks.
After he had been head of the company for 3 1/2 years, he and his partners sold it to Phibro, a powerful commodity trading outfit, for $550 million in Phibro stock.
Limited partner Billy Salomon, whose family name had been on the firm's door for 70 years and who had hoped it would be there forever, was not consulted.
Mr. Gutfreund collected $32 million, while Billy Salomon got $10 million, much less than if he had conducted the sale. "I felt betrayed," he later said.
Worse, Salomon's timing had been off.
Its profits, unlike Phibro's, soared over the next two years, and had it held out, Salomon could have gotten an even bigger bundle. 

The book also recounts the not dissimilar maneuvers surrounding the changing of the guard at Lehman Bros. and other grand old firms.
Often the genteel, conservative, long-term-oriented investment bankers were displaced by crude traders: "When angered, he cursed so forcefully that his face reddened and his pale-blue eyes narrowed into tiny slits," the authors say of Lehman's Lewis Glucksman. 

The earlier generation of "our crowd" bankers -- Belmonts, Warburgs, Lehmans, Baches and Schiffs -- had stressed above all probity, tradition, continuity and reputation.
They were old-fashioned elegant gentlemen, who happened to be of German Jewish extraction.
But in the harsh world of today's Wall Street they have lost out to more aggressive and sometimes less scrupulous successors.
The cuckoo prefers the nests of other birds and heaves out their eggs.
But the old guard hired the New Crowd people: It brought in its own cuckoos.
So, as the Old Crowd toppled from the branch, it shouldn't have been too surprised. 

The old guard had every right, however, to disdain the newcomers' new ways of making money, such as greenmail. (A Fortune article on Saul Steinberg was entitled, "Fear and Loathing in the Corporate Boardrooms.") Their other staple has been corporate takeovers, often hostile and financed by junk bonds.
Hostile takeovers are quite a new phenomenon.
Sometimes they are constructive, but often not.
First, by making management focus on short-term results, they inhibit building for the future -- just the opposite of Japan.
Second, a long-term shareholder of a good company needn't worry too much when the stock price drops temporarily: It will bounce back.
But if a raider takes over when the stock is weak, the shareholder never gets his recovery. 

The raiders, meanwhile, have evolved their own pattern for spending their new millions.
As described in "The New Crowd," they take on ambitious new wives, move to Greenwich, Conn., or Bedford, N.Y., buy OK pictures, and let their wives share the wealth with decorators.
Having donated heavily to museums, they demand a place on their boards. 

The book is patronizing about this nouveau riche struggle for respectability, which has its tawdry aspects.
However, on balance, the charity game helps America.
If those who have the money don't get involved with the museums and the charities, then City Hall will do it, badly.
It has been rightly observed that the main thing wrong with tainted money is, t'aint enough of it. 

A handful of the New Crowd operators have crossed the line from the immoral to the illegal, and have ended up in the slammer or paying huge fines: Ivan Boesky, Dennis Levine, Martin Siegel, Victor and Steven Posner, and now Michael Milken and perhaps Leona Helmsley.
The glitzy office that Ivan Boesky vacated for a prison cell had previously contained commodity operators Marc Rich and "Pinky" Green, today fugitives from a potential century apiece of jail sentences. 

The Old Crowd is deeply concerned by the backlash from all this.
However, the phenomenon is not specifically Jewish.
It has always been true that those outside the club want to climb in, and that a few will cut corners in the process.
Some pretty seamy stuff built the turn-of-the-century families' Fifth Avenue and Newport palazzi and endowed their daughters' weddings to foreign noblemen.
Mr. Boesky was a piker compared to Jay Gould and Jim Fiske, and Commodore Vanderbilt thought nothing of bribing judges and legislators.
So who knows?
In a generation or two some of the New Crowd may attain true respectability, perhaps to be displaced in turn by a later flock of unscrupulous raptors.
Or perhaps Wall Street, when it has suffered enough, will realize that finance is a service industry, and change its ethos. 

Mr. Train is president of Train, Smith Investment Counsel, New York. 

