.START 

In one of the first indoor air-pollution cases to go to trial, a state-court jury decided in favor of the defendant, Burlington Industries Inc. 

The verdict, reached late last week in Cincinnati, may end an eight-year legal battle for the Greensboro, N.C., carpet maker. 

Glenn and Sharon Beebe of Cincinnati had sued the com- pany in 1981 after installing Burlington carpets in their office.
The Beebes alleged that toxic fumes from the carpets made them sick.
As a result of their illness, the Beebes said, they lost $1.8 million in wages and earnings.
In addition, they said that months of exposure to the chemicals has left them sensitive to a wide range of commonly used substances. 

The case had been closely watched because attorneys anticipate increasing litigation nationally over the so-called sick-building syndrome.
Plaintiffs' lawyers say that buildings become "sick" when inadequate fresh air and poor ventilation systems lead pollutants to build up inside. 

Anthony J. Iaciofano, a lawyer for Burlington, said the company believes the Beebes' symptoms were not related to the carpeting.
He said that ill effects from new carpets manifest themselves immediately but that the Beebes' symptoms appeared months later. 

Catherine Adams, the Beebes' lawyer, said the verdict would not discourage other plaintiffs from filing such suits.
Scientists are only beginning to understand what causes sick-building syndrome and much of that research was unavailable when the Beebes filed the case, she said. 

The Beebes now believe that a prime culprit for their injuries was fumes from an adhesive used in the carpeting.
But the Beebes didn't come to that conclusion until time limits had elapsed for adding the adhesives maker as a defendant in the case, Ms. Adams said. 

The Beebes have not yet decided whether to appeal. 

TIMES SQUARE development opponents are dealt setback. 

The Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court dismissed six lawsuits attempting to block a $2.5 billion project planned for 42nd Street in Manhattan. 

Opponents of the project had claimed that the city and the state of New York, which are co-sponsoring the project, had failed to adhere to environmental guidelines. 

All but two of the 40 or so lawsuits that have been filed since the project's 1984 approval have been dismissed before the trial stage.
The two that remain haven't yet reached the pre-trial fact-finding stage. 

State officials said the court's ruling clears the way for proceedings to condemn buildings in the area. "This project is ready to move," said State Urban Development Corp. Chairman Vincent Tese. 

But developers of four planned office towers cautioned that obstacles still remain.
As part of the agreement with the state, the developers -- a partnership of Park Tower Realty and Prudential Insurance Co. of America -- said they would not proceed with condemnation proceedings while there was "significant litigation" pending. 

Park Tower General Counsel Matthew Mayer said the development team will have to review two additional lawsuits before putting up a $155 million letter of credit to cover condemnation costs.
Also, he said, the partnership is waiting to see whether the appellate division's ruling will be appealed. 

The plan, which has been plagued with delays and business-related setbacks, seeks to transform the area from a seedy thoroughfare to a more wholesome office and theater district. 

State and city officials are still negotiating with developers to renovate historic theaters and build and operate a merchandise mart and hotel. 

FEDERAL JUDGE EXPANDS role of U.S. courts in extradition decisions. 

U.S. District Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn, N.Y., ruled that a man implicated in an attack on an Israeli passenger bus in 1986 can be extradited to Israel for trial. 

A magistrate had initially refused the request, ruling that the attack had been a political act for which the man, Mahmoud El-Abed Ahmad, would be exempt from extradition.
However, Judge Weinstein wrote in his opinion late last month that terrorism and acts of war against civilians cannot be defined as political acts. 

Judge Weinstein also ruled that judges must consider prior to extradition whether the defendant will be treated fairly in a foreign court.
To do so, the judge said, the U.S. courts must review the judicial process in the foreign country independently of the State Department's assessment.
He said that in this case he concurred with the State Department's decision that Mr. Ahmad should be extradited.
Mr. Ahmad's lawyer said he would appeal. 

Lawyers close to the case said they believed the ruling was unprecedented. 

"Up until now the courts have said it is not their role to supervise the foreign country's courts," said Jacques Semmelman, the assistant U.S. attorney on the case. 

FORMER CANADIAN AMBASSADOR to the U.S. Allan E. Gotlieb has joined the Philadelphia law firm of Pepper, Hamilton & Scheetz as a consultant.
Mr. Gotlieb, who serves as a consultant to Stikeman, Elliott, one of Canada's biggest law firms, is advising Pepper Hamilton's Washington office on legal matters related to Canadian-U.S. investment, corporate finance and international transactions. 

QUOTABLE: In a speech prepared for delivery in New York yesterday, retired Justice Lewis Powell contested the notion that the last Supreme Court term marked a turn toward conservatism: "Commentators who agreed on little else unanimously proclaimed a `shift in direction' on the court. . . . I take these pronouncements, like many that have preceded them in past years, with a grain of salt.
In an era of `sound bites' and instant opinion polls it is dangerous to apply broad labels to a single term." 

