.START 

In August, soon after Wang Laboratories Inc. reported a staggering $424.3 million loss and replaced its president, two Boston sales representatives sent customers a letter saying: "We fully expect that you will soon be reading stories in the press reporting the `Amazing Comeback at Wang. '" 

How soon Wang will stage a comeback, or if it will at all, are still matters of debate.
But Wang salespeople are trying to cope with the biggest challenge any marketer can face: selling the products of a company that is on the ropes. 

"If your prospect is feeling risk the whole time and you're not feeling as if you're backed up by a stable company, you've lost it before you've begun," says Mary Ann Cluggish, a Wellesley, Mass., sales trainer and consultant who works with high technology companies. 

It can happen in any industry.
Consider the difficulties faced by Audi salespeople when the car was tainted by false charges of sudden acceleration, or Exxon dealers' problems in the wake of the Valdez oil spill. 

Like thousands of salespeople before them, Wang's are finding ways to combat the bad news. "It's very important that we exude confidence, even though within the family we know there's a lot of hard work ahead," said Richard Miller, the Lowell, Mass., computer concern's new president, in a video message to salespeople a month after he took over. 

Wang got into financial trouble because of bloated overhead and overly optimistic sales forecasts.
Its mainline minicomputers and word processors have lost ground to cheaper personal computers.
Last year it funded its high employment by heavy borrowing, and it suffered huge losses when sales turned down instead of rising. 

After the company reported red ink for the fiscal third quarter, Wang's marketing department provided the sales force answers to questions such as "How could you not have known you were going to lose $55 million?" and "Is Wang still a viable company?" 

Salespeople try to push their products and avoid discussions of finances.
Responding to such questions is "defensive," says Kenneth Olissa, Wang's vice president, marketing. "That's antithetical to the art of selling." Moreover, he notes that analyzing financial results "poses a problem for a salesman who isn't particularly familiar with a balance sheet." 

At one sales strategy meeting, an executive suggested ordering salespeople to become experts on the annual report.
Mr. Miller vetoed that: "Even I can't understand all the footnotes," he says.
Instead, he says, if the salespeople can get the customers to consider Wang's products on their merits, he or a top financial officer will try to assuage the fears about finances. 

Mike Metschan, a salesman in Wang's Austin, Texas, office, has a breezier method: "We tell them $3 billion companies don't go out of business.
We tell them all the major companies are having financial difficulties." Numerous computer companies are having sales slumps and earnings declines, but very few have had losses comparable to Wang's or are carrying such a large debt load. 

Mr. Miller says that after a sharp sales slump in July and August, sales stabilized in September.
Although Wang will report a loss for the first quarter ended Sept. 30 and the full fiscal year, Mr. Miller says he expects the company will return to profitability by the fourth quarter. 

Experts on sales technique say anyone representing a troubled company must walk a fine line. "If a salesman jeopardizes his credibility in this time of trouble, it will be a problem for the long run," says George Palmatier, a Minden, Nev., sales consultant and author of "The Marketing Edge." 

Still, says John Sullivan, a management recruiter with Daniel Roberts Inc. of Boston, who has held senior sales positions at Polaroid and Atari: "The customer will react to strength.
Ignore the present condition.
Show it's business as usual." 

That isn't easy.
Wang's customers are data processing managers who want to be sure that their suppliers are stable, wellrun companies that will be around to fix bugs and upgrade computers for years to come. 

For buyers, "these are career-risking decisions," says Jean Conlin, who supervises a network of Wang computers in the admissions department at Boston University.
The university is considering installing a $250,000 system to store applications electronically. "Before the really bad news, we were looking at Wang fairly seriously," she says.
But "their present financial condition means I'd have a hard time convincing the vice president in charge of purchasing." 

Ms. Conlin adds: "At some point we'd have to ask, `How do we know that in three years you won't be in Chapter 11? '" 

During the past year, Wang has developed new products and a new strategy and hired a new president.
Wang's overall product line is "still not as good as other vendors, but they've come a long way," says Steven Wendler, a consultant with market researcher Gartner Group, Stamford, Conn. "They were on the road to recovery in terms of customer attitudes until this bad quarter happened." 

The first priority for Wang's sales force is to make sure it holds on to existing customers.
Wang's installed base is one of its greatest assets, and many of those customers remain extremely loyal. 

But even before Wang's latest financial troubles surfaced, some customers "were trying to wall off their Wang installations" so other departments wouldn't add Wang, says Chris Christiansen, a former Wang marketer who is now a market analyst with Meta Group, a market research firm in Stamford, Conn. 

One Wang salesman who left the company in July recalls that when he tried to sell products to Eastman Kodak, he worked "to muster support from internal allies," but "those allies became skeptical as they saw the downtrend.
The more recent losses were really devastating." 

New customers, the source of higher commissions for salespeople and the key to Wang's long-term viability, are even tougher.
Rick Lynch, a former top salesman in Wang's Boston office, referring to Wang's mainstay computer line, says: "You can't sell a VS to a new customer." Mr. Lynch left Wang this summer for Oracle Systems Inc., a software vendor. 

The financial problems are particularly frustrating for salespeople pushing Wang's image systems, which convert paper forms to electronic documents.
Consultants say that Wang's technology is among the best available in the image market. 

But salespeople often found that news of Wang's problems superseded their sales efforts.
William Tait, a former sales manager in Indianapolis, says that his office had all but sold a $1.5 million image system to pharmaceutical maker Eli Lilly & Co. "When they were making the decision, all hell broke loose with the finances." He says the Lilly executives told him they couldn't take the risk with Wang. 

Mr. Tait say he doesn't blame Lilly.
Buyers have to rely on a supplier "continually upgrading and replacing the product," he says. "When a company realizes that, it's hard to go with Wang." For Mr. Tait, who says he used to earn as much as $150,000 a year at Wang, it was one more reason to quit.
He is now president of Eastate Homes Inc., an Indianapolis contractor. 

It can be hard for a salesperson to fight off feelings of discouragement.
Brian Petre, a former Wang salesman in upstate New York, says: "You have pride in your job.
You think you can go out and turn things around.
It's a tough thing when you can't.
The reason doesn't relate to your selling skills." 

Discouragement feeds on itself. "The problem is, if people get down in the dumps, they stop selling," says Mike Durcan, a laid-off sales manager in Wang's Austin office. 

One key for salespeople is to boost their own morale.
Paul Hellman, a Framingham, Mass., sales and management consultant and author of "Ready, Aim, You're Hired," says: "The bad news is, you'll be rejected more.
The good news is, it's not your fault." So, he advises, make goals achievable.
For instance, he suggests that salespeople making telephone calls should say to themselves: "All I want to do today is get 50 rejections." 

But Mr. Miller, Wang's new president, recently warned his salespeople about negativism. "Our customers watch us for the hidden message," he said. "Look a customer right in the eye and say, `I'm glad to be at Wang. '" 

