.START 

The lethal shudders that wracked the San Francisco Bay Area -- rated a 6.9 on the Richter scale -- didn't match the great earthquake of 1906, rated at 8.25. 

The difference of just 1.35 points on the scale, designed by Charles Richter of CalTech in the 1930s, means the older quake was "10 to 20 times stronger," says Lane Johnson, director of the University of California Berkeley Seismographic Station. 

The ground ruptured along a 20-to-30-mile stretch of the San Andreas Fault on Tuesday, Mr. Johnson added.
In 1906, the rupture was 300 miles long and a couple feet wide. 

Though the epicenter of Tuesday's temblor was located 10 miles north of the town of Santa Cruz, and 50 miles south of San Francisco, its havoc hopscotched up the coast in seemingly random fashion.
But the greatest damage was visited on buildings and roadways perched upon landfill, as were the Marina District of San Francisco and the Bay Bridge -- two areas of maximum devastation. 

"Landfill -- loose and unconsolidated earth -- may feel like rock but it behaves like liquid when you shake it," said Douglas Segar, professor of geosciences at San Francisco State University in a televised interview. "It liquefies in a patchwork quilt pattern.
Our quake behaved much like the Mexico City earthquake, where great damage was miles from the epicenter." 

Mr. Johnson, of the Berkeley seismographic station, said: "Landfill can be done if it's properly compacted.
You can drive piles on it and build on it." He cited the example of San Francisco's financial district, where many new glass towers survived almost unscathed. 

But the public policy issues raised by earthquake damage will be difficult to address, Mr. Johnson predicted. 

"The attention span of the public is short," he said. "We've known for years and years we've got lots of old {pre-1950s} unreinforced brick and masonry buildings." 

One old building, the Golden State Bank Building on Front Street, had its yellow brick facade sheared off by the shock of the quake, leaving a wedge of its third floor open to the air, while piles of dusty bricks tumbled to the street below narrowly missing rush-hour pedestrians and cars.
Reinforcing such old building stock, Mr. Johnson said, "comes down to money.
It's a danger.
We know it's there.
And sooner or later, we have to do something about it." 

The urgency is heightened because this week's earthquake -- while major and followed by hundreds of aftershocks -- didn't release enough pent-up energy tension along the faultlines to preclude more and bigger quakes soon. 

"The big one is still due," Mr. Johnson predicted in an interview. "The Bay Area has three very dangerous faults, the San Andreas, the Hayward fault and the Calaveras fault.
It {Tuesday's quake} hasn't solved our problem.
In California, this is the reality." 

