.START 

Times may be tough on Wall Street for some, but a few bosses are making as much as ever -- or more. 

At Bear Stearns Cos., for example, the 15 executive officers led by Chairman Alan "Ace" Greenberg got a pay increase to $35.9 million for the 14-month period ended June 30 from $22.9 million for the 12 months ended April 30, 1988.
The figures don't include substantial dividends on holdings of Bear Stearns stock.
Mr. Greenberg himself was paid $4.5 million, before an estimated $1.5 million in dividends, up from $2.4 million the year before. 

The increase is noted in the brokerage firm's latest proxy statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Because it operates on a fiscal year, Bear Stearns's yearly filings are available much earlier than those of other firms.
The latest period includes 14 months instead of 12 because Bear Stearns changed to a fiscal year ending in June instead of April. 

Meanwhile, Bear Stearns's 650 stock and bond salesmen saw thinner paychecks over the past year, which the company says reflected lower commission revenue caused by a decline in investor activity in the markets.
However, Bear Stearns on Monday reported improved earnings for its first quarter, ended Sept. 29, partly because of a 31% increase in commissions during the quarter. 

William J. Montgoris, chief financial officer, defended the lofty salaries at Bear Stearns. "All of us are on a base salary of $200,000 if the firm makes nothing -- and that's pretty low as far as Wall Street goes," Mr. Montgoris said.
However, Bear Stearns has never had an unprofitable year since its founding 65 years ago. 

Four Bear Stearns executives besides the 62-year-old Mr. Greenberg were paid $3 million or more before dividends for the 14 months ended in June. 

According to the proxy statement, James E. Cayne, 55, Bear Stearns's president, made $3.9 million; an executive vice president, Michael L. Tarnopol, 53, made nearly $3.4 million; and two executive vice presidents, Vincent J. Mattone, 44, and William J. Michaelcheck, 42, made about $3.3 million each. 

Mr. Montgoris said the firm has a "straight mathematical formula" for determining compensation, based on the firm's earnings. "Just because a particular element of the firm is down," such as stockbrokerage, "doesn't mean the executive committee should be paid less," he said. 

