.START 

Just after midnight Monday, federal spending started to drop by $16 billion.
What do you say we all close down the poker game, go home and bank the $16 billion? 

That's essentially what budget director Richard Darman is suggesting, and we think he deserves as much support as he can get.
If human beings can't cut federal spending honestly -- and they can't -- let the computers do it. 

Congress, with a measure of White House complicity, has been manipulating the spending accounts for years under the cover of omnibus appropriations bills. (Indeed without earlier manipulations, the current sequester of $16 billion would have been even larger.) We suspect voters are fed up with the finagling.
Consider, for instance, that even yesterday's widely publicized sequester is likely to be traduced if business as usual is allowed to prevail. 

Under the law, Gramm-Rudman's across-the-board-cuts in federal programs are supposed to be permanent.
Social Security and spending for poor people are exempted.
However, the Associated Press's account of the Monday sequester order signed by President Bush neatly captured the contempt Congress shows toward the notion of a legally binding commitment: "Lawmakers have been saying for weeks that they plan to roll back the cuts as soon as they agree to a compromise on a deficit-cutting bill." 

Mr. Darman's inclination to save the sequester was backed up yesterday by White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater: "There is some feeling here that the cuts are the way to go.
It will reduce spending in a very effective fashion." This attitude is being waved away by sophisticates around Washington as little more than tough talk.
It looks to us like a golden opportunity for George Bush to chop off at the knees all this talk about a timid, unserious presidency.
Mr. Bush would be acting in the public interest if he let the Washington elites who manipulate these budgets -- the bureaucrats, the lobbyists, the congressional staffers -- live for just one year on a restricted diet.
Ask Tommy Lasorda; thin is in.
Senator Phil Gramm pointed out Monday that in the 20 years before Gramm-Rudman was enacted in 1985, federal spending grew by about 11% a year; since the law, it's grown at under 5% annually.
Another major factor in this positive trend was Ronald Reagan's decision early in his presidency to fight the budget war on the expenditure side rather than raising taxes. 

George Bush's continued support of the tax dam sustains this strategy of pressuring Congress to make choices among competing priorities, rather than just saying yes to all the grateful special-interest constituencies that fill the PAC trough.
If Washington's elites ever succeed in bursting the tax dam, Americans will be engulfed in a red sea of new spending programs, such as federalized child care. 

Child care was one of the many "extraneous" bills pulled out of the Senate's reconciliation bill last Friday.
Others were the capital-gains cut, Section 89 repeal, the disabled workers bill, and the unprecedented reconsideration of the catastrophic health act.
All this stuff still is in the House's 1,878-page reconciliation bill, and many Members say they're reluctant to pull out cherished bills, just to see them die.
Republicans especially want a guarantee from the House leadership that they'll get an up-or-down vote on the bills. 

House Speaker Foley ought to deliver that promise.
This is the way government is supposed to work, with politicians taking responsibility for votes that their constituents can identify, instead of concealing them in the great reconciliation garbage truck. 

We have as much nostalgia as anyone for those leafy, breezy days in Washington when honorable men and women dickered over budgets and even log-rolled a bit to see that the bridges got build, roads paved, soldiers paid or that the desperately poor were cared for.
Those days are gone.
Nor do we see any reason to believe that a metropolitan Washington that has gotten fat and rich and lazy in the shadow of the federal colossus will change much on its own initiative. 

Save the sequester, and let Washington scream. 

