.START 

Wall Street Journal reporters called companies with headquarters or facilities in the Bay area in a bid to assess the damage to their operations caused by Tuesday's earthquake.
The calls reached many, but certainly not all, of the publicly held companies with operations in the area.
In most cases damage to company facilities and operations was minimal. 

ADIA SERVICES INC., Menlo Park, temporary personnel agency, annual sales of $504 million, OTC, said all 30 offices in Bay area were working, but in various states of disarray.
Business was slow because many companies were closed yesterday. 

ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES INC., Sunnyvale, integrated circuit maker, annual sales of $1.12 billion, NYSE, had only minor structural damage.
Most of its 4,500 workers were at work yesterday, and no production slowdown was anticipated as long as electricity remains available. 

AMDAHL CORP., Sunnyvale, computer maker, annual sales of $1.8 billion, Amex, was closed yesterday and no damage estimates were available. 

AMERICAN BUILDING MAINTENANCE INDUSTRIES Inc., San Francisco, provider of maintenance services, annual revenue of $582 million, NYSE, had some damage to headquarters and lost phone service, but operations were moved to a branch office and are running smoothly thanks to a decentralized computer system the company had developed before the quake. 

AMERICAN PRESIDENT COS., Oakland, shipping concern, annual sales of $2.2 billion, NYSE, had little damage to the cranes, dock or rail track at its container-ship facility near the collapsed Route 880 overpass.
The company expects to work a ship due in today with minimal delays, despite sporadic power. 

ANACOMP INC., Indianapolis, NYSE, said its Xidex Corp. unit, a Sunnyvale maker of computer disks and microfilm with annual sales of $637 million, had only minor damage and is fully operational. 

ANTHEM ELECTRONICS INC., San Jose, distributor of electronic parts, annual sales of about $300 million, NYSE, sustained very little damage, anticipated being "in 100% operating condition" by midday. 

APPLE COMPUTER CO., Cupertino, computer maker, annual sales of $4.07 billion, OTC, sustained some structural damage.
Offices were closed yesterday. 

APPLIED MATERIALS INC., Santa Clara, maker of computer-chip machine systems, annual sales of $490 million, OTC, had slight damage to headquarters, no damage to manufacturing plants.
Company, with 1,750 workers in area, is fully functional. 

ATARI CORP., Sunnyvale, maker of personal computers and software, annual sales of $700 million, Amex, had minor damage and expects to be fully operational by tomorrow. 

BANKAMERICA Corp., San Francisco, bank holding company, annual revenue of $10.2 billion, NYSE, yesterday had no power at its headquarters, 80 of its 433 Northern California branches were closed and 250 of 750 automatic teller machines were closed in the area.
Securities trading was conducted in a backup facility in Concord. 

BECHTEL CORP., San Francisco, engineering and construction concern, annual sales of $4 billion, had only minor structural damage at its three buildings in the city, but its computers were knocked out.
Backup computer tapes were hand-carried to an IBM office in Philadelphia, and the company expects its mainframe to be up in a few days.
Workers, except for senior management, were asked not to report for work yesterday. 

BIO-RAD LABORATORIES INC., Hercules, biological research and clinical-products leader, $200 million in annual sales, Amex, said its Richmond warehouse north of San Francisco was closed because of debris and fallen shelves.
It expects to be fully operational by next week. 

BORLAND INTERNATIONAL, Scotts Valley, personal computer and software designer, annual sales of $72 million, had heavy damage to its headquarters and was conducting business from its parking lot.
The company doesn't expect any shipping delays. 

BUSINESSLAND INC., San Jose, computer retail company, annual sales of $1.1 billion, NYSE, said all 16 corporate office and stores in the area were open with the exception of a retail center in San Francisco's business district.
That facility should reopen today. 

CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES Inc., Los Angeles, retailer, annual sales of $2.79 billion, NYSE, said nine of its 22 Emporium stores in the area were closed because of water damage, broken windows and fallen displays.
A spokesman said sales are expected to be hurt, but the losses are covered by insurance. 

CHEVRON CORP., San Francisco, oil company, annual sales of $25.2 billion, NYSE, had minor damage to downtown headquarters, but structural damage closed two of its seven buildings in San Ramone industrial park.
Company expects to be fully operational by next week. 

CLOROX Co., Oakland, consumer products, annual sales of $1.36 billion, NYSE, was closed yesterday but plans to reopen today or tomorrow.
Meanwhile, orders are being routed through Kingsford Products unit in Louisville, Ky., but computer problems mean they must be processed manually.
Expects to be fully operational early next week. 

COHERENT INC., Palo Alto, laser maker, annual sales of $159 million, was closed yesterday but expects to reopen today. 

CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC., Menlo Park, trucking company, $2.69 billion in annual sales, NYSE, had structural damage to CF Motor Freight subsidiary's office in Palo Alto, no damage in Menlo Park. 

COOPER COMPANIES INC., Palo Alto, medical products maker, annual sales of $628 million, NYSE, had little damage and was in full operation yesterday. 

DAYTON HUDSON CORP., Minneapolis, retailer, annual sales of $12.2 billion, NYSE, closed seven of its 13 Bay-area Target discount stores and nine of its 20 Mervyn's department stores because of pending reviews by structural engineers or requests from authorities, who were trying to keep shoppers off the freeways.
The company expects to reopen three Target stores and all but two Mervyn's today or tomorrow. 

DIASONICS INC., South San Francisco, maker of magnetic resonance imaging equipment, annual sales of $281 million, Amex, had minor damage, mostly in a stockroom.
The company plans to be fully operational today. 

DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP., Maynard, Mass., computer maker, annual sales of $12.7 billion, NYSE, had structural damage at its San Francisco sales office but no appreciable damage elsewhere in the area, including its Cupertino plant. 

DREYER'S GRAND ICE CREAM INC., Oakland, ice cream maker, annual sales of $225 million, OTC, said it is delivering ice cream wherever roads are passable. 

EVEREX SYSTEMS INC., Fremont, maker of personal computers and peripherals, annual sales of $377 million, OTC, had minor damage and was almost fully operational yesterday.
EXXON Corp., New York, oil company, NYSE, said its refinery northeast of San Francisco was operating at a slightly reduced rate as a precaution in case of aftershocks. 

FORD MOTOR CO., Dearborn, Mich., auto maker, annual sales of $92.4 billion, NYSE, said its three Ford Aerospace unit facilities in the Bay area, including a satellite-assembly operation in Palo Alto, had no major damage. 

GAP Inc., San Bruno, clothing retailer, annual sales of $1.25 billion, NYSE, expects most of its stores to return to full operation and all 2,500 of its Bay-area workers to be back at work by today. 

GENENTECH INC., South San Francisco, biotechnology company, annual sales of $334.8 million, NYSE, sustained no major damage and expects to be fully operational today. 

GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Fairfield, Conn., consumer, industrial products and broadcasting concern, annual sales of $50 billion, NYSE, said its GE Nuclear Energy unit, with 1,600 Bay-area employees, had only minor damage at its San Jose headquarters.
Business wasn't disrupted. 

GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Detroit, auto maker, annual sales of $123.6 billion, NYSE, sustained about 10 injuries to workers and some ruptured water mains at its New United Motor Manufacturing Inc. facility in Fremont, a joint venture with Toyota Motor Corp.
There was limited production of some models yesterday, but it wasn't clear when the normal 750-car-a-day pace will resume.
Plant officials are still assessing damage to parts suppliers and Port of Oakland facilities that handle shipments to the plant. 

GOLDEN WEST FINANCIAL CORP., Oakland, savings and loan, annual revenue of $1.4 billion, NYSE, had only minor damage to a few branches and no injured employees. 

HEWLETT-PACKARD Co., Palo Alto, personal computer and electronic equipment maker, annual sales of $9.8 billion, NYSE, said there will be a "minimal suspension" of manufacturing for an undefined period.
The computer system was operating, so orders could be taken.
The company has 18,000 employees and more than 70 buildings in the Bay area.
One building in Palo Alto may be damaged beyond repair.
Others had lesser damage and there were no injuries among workers.
Damage will be "easily in the millions," the company said. 

HEXCEL Corp., Dublin, manufacturer of engineered parts, annual sales of $399 million, NYSE, had little damage beyond some phone trouble. 

HOMESTAKE MINING CO., San Francisco, gold and general miner, annual sales of $432.6 million, NYSE, said its headquarters was closed yesterday because of power failures and lack of water, but that it may reopen today.
It expects any impact on its business to be slight. 

HOMESTEAD FINANCIAL CORP., Millbrae, financial services concern, annual revenue of $562 million, OTC, said three of its 17 Bay-area branches were closed yesterday.
The company expects all branches to reopen today. 

INMAC CORP., Santa Clara, maker of computer accessories, annual sales of $250 million, OTC, said telephones were out at its headquarters but service should be restored by today.
The company said it was doing a brisk business in computer power-surge protectors, cables and uninterruptable power sources. 

INTEL Corp., Santa Clara, semiconductor maker, annual sales of $2.87 billion, OTC, had some damage and few people were at work yesterday. 

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES Corp, Armonk, N.Y., maker of business machines, NYSE, said flooding caused by broken water pipes closed its San Jose plant, which makes high-end data-storage devices.
The plant and its 8,500 employees gradually will resume operations over the next several days, the company said.
Also closed yesterday were the company's Santa Teresa software-development lab and the Almaden research center.
The concern's National Service Division opened a center for emergency service in Walnut Creek as part of its disaster-recovery plan. 

KAISER ALUMINUM & CHEMICAL, Oakland, metal and chemical maker, annual sales of $2.22 billion, had slight structural damage to its 28-story headquarters building and employees stayed home yesterday to allow crews to clean up. 

LOCKHEED CORP., Calabasas, aerospace and defense concern, annual sales of $10.59 billion, NYSE, said its Lockheed Missiles & Space division closed its Santa Cruz test facility because of power outages and landslides.
The closing, affecting 266 employees, will continue at least until roads are cleared.
It wasn't known to what extent, if any, the facility was damaged.
It also wasn't known what the impact will be on the division's work, which includes the Navy's Trident submarine-based missile program and the Air Force's Strategic Defense Initiative.
The division had only minor damage at its Sunnyvale headquarters and plant in Palo Altos, and no delays in deliveries are expected. 

LONGS DRUG STORES INC., Walnut Creek, drugstore chain, annual sales of $1.9 billion, NYSE, had only minor damage and only four of its 75 Bay-area stores, all in the Santa Cruz area, were closed.
All are expected to reopen soon. 

LSI LOGIC CORP., Milpitas, maker of customized integrated circuits, annual sales of $550 million, NYSE, has halted manufacturing at its three plants in the area while they are inspected for structural damage.
The company expects to resume full operations by today. 

R.H. MACY & Co., New York, retailer, annual sales of $7 billion, said there was minor damage to its 24 Macy stores and nine I. Magnin stores in the Bay area. 

MEASUREX CORP., Cupertino, maker of computer integrated manufacturing processes, annual sales of $265 million, NYSE, had only minor damage but workers spent most of yesterday cleaning up. 

NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR CORP., Santa Clara, semiconductor maker, annual sales of $1.65 billion, NYSE, said it had no major structural damage at its 30 Bay-area buildings, but two workers were injured.
Production resumed yesterday.
Piping in a waste-treatment plant needed immediate repairs. 

NORDSTROM INC., Seattle, retailer, annual sales $2.33 billion, OTC, five of this 59-store chain's nine stores in the Bay Area were closed yesterday, damage appears primarily cosmetic, hopes to reopen four of the stores by today and the fifth by Saturday. 

ORACLE SYSTEMS CORP., Belmont, provider of computer programming and software services, annual sales $584 million, four of 12 offices and buildings in the Belmont and San Mateo areas were closed, 95% of computer and telephone systems are operating, expects to be back to full operation by the end of the week. 

PACIFIC GAS & ELECTRIC CO., San Francisco, electric, gas and water supplier, annual sales $7.6 billion, some minor damage to headquarters, undetermined damage to four nearby substations, severe structural damage to a major power plant at Moss Landing, extensive damage to gas lines and electric lines, 400,000 residences without electricity and 69,000 without gas, cannot reconnect electricity until it is certain there are no gas leaks, no predictions on when this will happen. 

PACIFIC TELESIS GROUP, San Francisco, telecommunications holding company, annual sales of $9.5 billion, no damage to headquarters, but no power, the power failure has caused a delay in the release of the company's earnings report, major concern is subsidiaries, Pacific Bell and Pacific Telesis Cellular, both of which sustained damage to buildings, structural damage to several cellular sites in Santa Cruz, volume of calls on cellular phones 10 times the usual, causing a big slowdown. 

PROCTER & GAMBLE CO., Cincinnati-based company's Folgers Coffee plant in South San Francisco was closed following the earthquake, no injuries or major damage, other plants around country can make up for any lost production. 

QUANTUM CORP., Milpitas, manufactures rigid disc drives for small business computers, word processors, annual sales $120.8 million, OTC, open for business, minor structural damage. 

RAYCHEM CORP., Menlo Park, plastics manufacturer, annual sales $1 billion, no major damage and no production slowdown is anticipated. 

ROSS STORES INC., Newark, discount apparel chain, annual sales $576 million, two of 28 stores in Bay Area closed, both could open as early as today. 

SAFEWAY STORES INC., Oakland, retail food chain, annual sales of $13.6 billion, some structural damage to headquarters and no power; major problems transporting products to those stores that remained open; no numbers on how many stores closed. 

CHARLES SCHWAB & CO., San Francisco, discount brokerage firm, annual sales of $392 million, had only minor damage to headquarters building and was up and running for yesterday's market open.
Firm will not, however, resume 24-hour service until power in city is restored.
Office closed yesterday at 4:30 p.m. EDT. 

SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY, Scotts Valley, maker of hard disk drives for computers, annual sales of $1.37 billion, OTC, closed to assess what appeared to be minor damage to some of its 20 buildings. 

SOUTHERN PACIFIC TRANSPORTATION CO., San Francisco, railroad, annual sales of $2.41 billion, had only minor damage to headquarters and tracks, and expects to be fully operational tomorrow.
St. Louis Southwestern Railway Co. unit halted all service Tuesday night but has since restored some freight lines and limited commuter service between San Francisco and San Jose. 

SUN MICROSYSTEMS INC., Mountain View, maker of desktop computers, annual sales $1.77 billion, OTC, no injured employees and very little damage to buildings.
Closed yesterday due to power difficulties. 

TANDEM COMPUTERS INC., Cupertino, computer maker, annual sales of $1.6 billion, NYSE, said it had no significant damage and should be fully operational within a week.
Many employees stayed home yesterday, but customer service was being maintained. 

TRANSAMERICA CORP., San Francisco, financial services and insurance company, annual sales of $7.9 billion, NYSE, said its headquarters, the well-known downtown pyramid-shaped building, was intact but closed yesterday. 

VARIAN ASSOCIATES INC., Palo Alto, instrumentation and semiconductor equipment company, annual sales of $1.3 billion, had only minor damage and no slowdowns were anticipated.
VLSI TECHNOLOGY INC., San Jose, maker of semiconductor products, annual sales $171.9 million, OTC, minimal damage to facilities, no injuries, expected operations to return to normal late yesterday. 

WATKINS-JOHNSON CO., defense-oriented electronics manufacturer, annual sales $292 million, NYSE, minor damage to headquarters and plant in Palo Alto, no damage to San Jose plant, "still assessing" damage at Scotts Valley plant, where main product is furnaces for semiconductor production. 

WELLS FARGO & CO., San Francisco, bank holding company, annual revenue $4.9 billion, NYSE, minor damage at headquarters, 12 branches out of 170 in Northern California sustained structural damage that will preclude them from opening in the near future, 45 locations with at least one automatic teller machine inoperable, central computer systems are operating, no injuries. 

WYSE TECHNOLOGY INC., San Jose, maker of video display terminals and workstations and IBM/PC compatible computers, annual sales of $452 million, slight structural damage at headquarters, no injuries, expects to be back to full operation today. 

3COM CORP., Santa Clara, maker of computer communications systems, annual sales of $386 million, OTC, slight structural damage to headquarters, communications systems already fully operational. 

