.START 

Steve Jobs took a step back from the frontier of personal-computer technology in an effort to spur sales of Next Inc. 's new machine. 

Mr. Jobs moved to remedy a couple of his computer's drawbacks yesterday by lowering the entry-level price for a Next machine by $1,500, or 23%, if the buyer chooses a hard-disk drive as an alternative to Next's optical-storage device.
The hard drive, which is the storage device of choice for virtually every desktop computer user, also now will supplement Next's futuristic optical device if buyers pay full price. 

Mr. Jobs, co-founder of Apple Computer Inc., founded Next four years ago in the hopes of fomenting a revolution in the way desktop computers are designed and used.
His Next computer, introduced about a year ago and aimed primarily at university computer users, sports snazzy graphics, digital sound, built-in networking and a sleek black design.
But the computer was proving a hard sell because of its high price, a lack of software and an optical data-storage device that was too slow. 

The machine began shipping at the end of last year.
The closely held company hasn't disclosed sales.
However, most universities that have bought the machines say they are buying small numbers for evaluation purposes. 

Universities can now buy a Next computer without an optical storage device for $4,995.
A computer with the optical device will still cost $6,495, but from now on Next will outfit every computer with a hard drive and supply one at no cost to those who have already bought Next machines. 

Commercial customers can purchase the same system through Businessland Inc., a computer retailer based in San Jose, Calif., for roughly $3,000 more. 

Mr. Jobs said the changes were prompted by requests from customers who are frustrated with the performance of the optical device, which isn't offered as standard equipment by any rivals.
Another factor was that customers were asking, "Why don't you give us a cheaper system?" Mr. Jobs said at a conference on university computing here.
Optical-storage devices can handle very large amounts of data and make it far easier to edit film clips or audio recordings with a computer.
But the technology, while reliable, is far slower than the widely used hard drives. 

To get around the delays caused by the optical device, Businessland, which is Next's exclusive dealer to corporations, has for months been advising customers to purchase hard drives with the machines. 

Next's decision to rely on the more-established hard drive in every Next computer doesn't signal a retreat from optical storage, said Mr. Jobs, who for years has said this technology will play a crucial role in the next decade. "We're extremely committed to optical storage technology" he said. "We think everything will go this way in a few years." He said that the next generation of optical drives will be as fast as hard drives, but he depends on outside suppliers for the devices. 

But university computer specialists, who welcomed the move, called it a necessary retreat from the cutting edge of technology and one that's likely to increase Next's sales on campuses. 

"From the standpoint of being on the forefront of technology, this is a step backward," said Jerry W. Sprecher, a senior computing manager for the California state university system. "But it will definitely boost Next's sales." 

Universities, however, say Next's prices must go even lower before large numbers of students purchase the machine. "We'd still like to see a student model," priced at about $3,500, said Ronald Johnson, director of academic computing at Minnesota's Gustavus Adolphus College, which has bought eight Next machines. 

Broad acceptance of Next's computer also is hindered by difficulty in distributing software for it.
Most software is distributed on cheap floppy disks, but the Next computer doesn't come with a device that reads them. 

Next's computer also needs more software applications, but Mr. Jobs said he expects more soon.
He said he expects Lotus Development Corp. to introduce a Next version of its popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet program in 1990. 

Educators added that Next needs to soon offer a color version of its computer.
Every major maker offers computers with color displays.
Next won't comment on when it will do the same, but is believed to have a color model under development. 

