.START 

Ogilvy & Mather, whose declining profitability prompted its takeover by WPP Group earlier this year, will see its profit margins bounce back to the "11.5% range" in 1990, said Graham Phillips, the agency's new chairman-elect. 

The ad agency's pretax profit margins were slightly under 10% at the time of the takeover, according to analysts; London-based WPP's goal is to increase margins to 12%. 

Mr. Phillips made his comments during an interview detailing his plans for the agency.
British-born, the 24-year Ogilvy veteran was named last week to succeed Kenneth Roman, who is leaving by year's end to take a top post at American Express, an Ogilvy client.
Surrounded by stacks of paper, two computers and photos of himself boating and flying, Mr. Phillips laid out several changes he hopes to make at the agency. 

First and foremost, Mr. Phillips said he hopes to improve client service.
Ogilvy under the fastidious Mr. Roman gained a reputation as occasionally being high-handed in its treatment of clients, of preaching what strategy a client should -- indeed, must -- follow.
And some of its top client-service executives, including Mr. Phillips, were promoted to the point they were saddled with administrative duties, with little time to see clients. 

But Mr. Phillips recently freed himself up to spend more time with clients by delegating much of his administrative work to a deputy.
He also plans to get to know clients that Mr. Roman was closer to, such as Lever Brothers, American Express and Seagram.
The two men are planning joint visits to a number of clients to attempt to smoothly hand over the reins. "Clients want to see more of our senior people involved in the business -- not once a month, but two or three times a week," he said. 

Mr. Phillips also hopes to finally implement a reorganization announced earlier this year but put on hold by the WPP takeover.
The reorganization is supposed to make one-stop shopping -- buying advertising, public relations and design all in one place, or "Ogilvy Orchestration" in Ogilvyspeak -- a reality. 

Under the reorganization, Ogilvy plans to name one executive on each account as a "client service director" to work as the client's single contact for all those services. "There is little or no integration of our work, quality is spotty, there is no single focus," Mr. Phillips complained to staffers in March, when the reorganization was announced.
Now Mr. Phillips says he hopes to have the new system in place for several clients -- including American Express, American Telephone & Telegraph and Ryder -- by year's end. 

Industry executives and analysts are divided on whether Mr. Phillips is up to the task.
He isn't as well-known to clients as is Mr. Roman.
Under his watch, office politicking was often rampant in the agency's New York operation and the office there has had a dismal new-business record for more than a year.
And while last week the agency hired a top Chiat/Day/Mojo executive, Bill Hamilton, to try to bolster its work, "Graham has to get the revenue of that New York office moving," says James Dougherty, an analyst with County NatWest Securities. 

The one thing Mr. Phillips clearly does have going for him is continuity, although it isn't certain if that will be enough.
As Mr. Dougherty says, "The last thing they need is enormous disruption at the top . . . and Graham is obviously a long-term member of the Ogilvy Mafia, as we call it." 

Mr. Phillips and Mr. Roman are indeed quite similar in substance, if not in style.
While Mr. Roman is a workaholic detailsman, Mr. Phillips would rather delegate, leaving him time for his interests outside the office.
Mr. Roman, by contrast, seems rarely to cut loose at all, although he did appear at Ogilvy's Halloween party Friday decked out in duck feet and a duck hat, costumed as a "lame duck." 

Mr. Phillips said the company's expected margin improvement will be all but inevitable, given that the company's profitability was dragged down this year by an expensive move to luxurious, oversized new New York headquarters.
The move, budgeted at about $7 million, actually came in at about $10 million, he said. 

But margins will be helped, too, by some other cost-saving steps.
Ogilvy eliminated the mail room staff, closed the executive dining room and, after the takeover, let go half a dozen financial executives.
WPP, which assumes financial control of its businesses in a hands-on way, instituted a new financial system and plans to sublet some floors in Ogilvy's new headquarters building to outsiders.
The fact that the agency will now be part of a U.K. company, under British accounting rules, will also make the profit picture look better. 

Y&R's Klein Steps Down 

Arthur Klein, president of Young & Rubicam's New York office, stepped down "temporarily" in the wake of charges by a federal grand jury in New Haven, Conn., that he, the agency and another top executive bribed Jamaican tourist officials to win its account in 1981. 

In an internal memo, Alex Kroll, the agency's chairman, said Mr. Klein decided to remove himself to minimize "negative reaction" from prospective clients and others and to prepare for his defense. "The fact that he is in the process of defending himself against the present charges could conceivably have an adverse impact on Y&R," Mr. Kroll wrote.
He said Mr. Klein will return to his post at the end of the trial "at which he will be vindicated." 

Mr. Klein will work with Mr. Kroll on some of the agency's joint venture activities and acquisitions while the case is pending.
Peter Georgescu, president of Y&R's ad operations, will assume Mr. Klein's day-to-day role. 

Wells Rich's New Partner 

Wells, Rich, Greene named Cheryl Heller as an executive vice president and creative partner in its image group, which concentrates on fashion and visually oriented advertising. 

Ms. Heller, 38, had headed up Boston agency Heller/Breene, a unit of WCRS.
The agency, with about $35 million in billings, will be dissolved, with some of its staffers absorbed by WCRS's Della Femina McNamee unit in Boston, Ms. Heller said.
She said it was too early to say what would happen to its clients, including Reebok and Apple. 

At Wells Rich, Ms. Heller will concentrate on accounts that include Philip Morris's Benson & Hedges cigarette brand, which relies on print ads, Ms. Heller's specialty.
As previously reported, the account is troubled, with Philip Morris asking Backer Spielvogel Bates, Ogilvy & Mather, and possibly others to try their hand at developing new creative work.
Wells Rich declined to comment on the status of the account, as did the other agencies. 

