.START 

We're sorry to see Nigel Lawson's departure from the British government.
He is a politician with the courage of true conviction, as in summarily sacking exchange controls and in particular slashing the top rate of income taxation to 40%.
But in the end his resignation as Chancellor of the Exchequer may be a good thing, especially if it works as he no doubt intends -- by forcing Prime Minister Thatcher and her counterparts elsewhere to confront the genuine intellectual issues involved. 

The early omens, we admit, scarcely suggest so wholesome an outcome.
The Fleet Street reaction was captured in the Guardian headline, "Departure Reveals Thatcher Poison." British politicians divide into two groups of chickens, those with their necks cut and those screaming the sky is falling.
So far as we can see only two persons are behaving with a dignity recognizing the seriousness of the issues: Mr. Lawson and Sir Alan Walters, the counterpoint of the Chancellor's difficulties, who also resigned as personal adviser to Mrs. Thatcher. 

The problem is that on the vital issue of monetary policy and exchange rates, conservative, free-market economists divide into at least three incompatible camps.
There are the strict monetarists, who believe that floating exchange rates free an economy to stabilize its price level by stabilizing the monetary aggregates.
There are the supply-side globalists, who seek to spread the advantages of a common currency through fixed exchange rates.
And there are the twin-deficit Keynesians, who predict/advocate devaluations to balance trade flows.
This is a problem not only for Prime Minister Thatcher but for President Bush, as shown in the ongoing bickering over the dollar between the Federal Reserve and the Mulford Treasury. 

In the British case, Mr. Lawson is the closest thing in London to a supply-side globalist.
He not only slashed marginal tax rates, initially sparking fresh growth in Britain, but he wanted to regulate monetary policy by targeting exchange rates, indeed joining the European Monetary System.
While no doubt agreeing with Mr. Lawson on everything else, Sir Alan is a dyed-in-the-wool monetarist, inclined to defend floating rates to the death. 

To make matters even more confusing, the earlier U.S. experience made clear that Mr. Lawson's tax cuts would have profound effects on Britain's international accounts and the value of sterling.
They increased the after-tax rate of return and made Britain a far more attractive place to invest, producing sudden capital inflows.
By accounting definitions, this had to produce a sudden trade deficit.
As in the U.S., it also produced a sudden burst in the demand for sterling, that is a surge in the sterling monetary aggregates, M-Whatever. 

At this point, the options were: Crunch money to stop the boost in the aggregates, as Sir Alan surely advised, and forget the soaring pound.
To push the pound even lower trying to cure the trade deficit, a policy Britain has repeatedly proved disastrous.
Or to supply enough money to meet the increased demand and stabilize the exchange rate, as the Chancellor argued, and ensure the permanence of this policy by joining the EMS. 

Faced with a similar situation, Paul Volcker let the dollar soar, (though monetary aggregates also grew so rapidly monetarists issued egg-on-the-face warnings of inflation).
But this devastated the U.S. manufacturing sector, laying the seeds of protectionism.
Mr. Lawson, though not allowed to join the EMS, chose to "shadow" the deutsche mark.
He reaped inflation along with rapid growth, no doubt validating Sir Alan's predictions in the Prime Minister's mind.
But more recently, the pound has been falling with high inflation, which has also seemed almost impervious to the high interest rates Mr. Lawson deployed to stop it. 

So the British experience presents a genuine puzzle that reaches far beyond the shores of Albion.
We had been soliciting opinions on it long before Mr. Lawson's resignation, and offer some of the collection for the benefit of his successor and one-time deputy, John Major.
To begin with, we should note that in contrast to the U.S. deficit, Britain has been running largish budget surpluses.
In pursuit of this mystery, Keynesian adepts and twin-deficit mavens need not apply. 

We should also add Mr. Lawson's own explanation, as we understand it.
Unlike the U.S., Britain never achieved even a momentary reduction in real wages.
The wage stickiness, which OECD studies confirm is particularly high in Britain, gives its economy a structural bias toward inflation.
Inflation is easier to spark and harder to control. 

We should also concede that in the British experience the monetarist cause regains some of the credibility it lost in the U.S. experience.
Nearby Paul Craig Roberts, a distinguished supply-sider with monetarist sympathies, argues the case for Sir Alan.
Perhaps the fiscal shock of tax cuts is after all best absorbed by floating rates, though of course in the event Mr. Lawson resigned over whether to support a weak pound, not restrain a strong one.
We recall that Mr. Roberts not only chides the Chancellor for being too easy because of a desire to constrain sterling, but also led the chorus saying that Mr. Volcker was too tight when he let the dollar rise.
Somewhere in between there must be a golden mean, perhaps measured by M-Whatever, but perhaps measured by purchasing power parity. 

The globalists tend to think Mr. Lawson ran onto technical reefs.
In fixing rates the choice of initial parities is crucial, for example, and perhaps he picked the wrong pound-DM rate.
For that matter, perhaps he fixed to the wrong currency.
We sympathize with Mrs. Thatcher's reluctance to tie her currency to one governed by the domestic political imperatives of West Germany.
Perhaps the shock would have been less if they'd fixed to another low-tax, deregulated, supply-side economy. 

Alan Reynolds of Polyconomics adds his suspicion that the unrecognized inflationary culprit is the budget surplus.
Those who can shake Keynesian ghosts out of their heads might recognize that the retirement of gilts for cash is equivalent to an expansionary open-market operation, indeed, it is the definition of an open market operation to expand the money supply.
Mr. Reynolds also notes that since British banks have no reserve requirements, high interest rates are less likely to curb inflation than to cause recession. 

We would add that in political terms, Mrs. Thatcher's problem was failing to decide between the Chancellor and her adviser.
In the end, neither policy was followed, and instead of learning anything we are left with a mystery.
In particular, "shadowing" a currency is anything but fixing; it is an open announcement that the exchange rate target has no credibility.
All the more so when strong voices are heard opposing the policy.
Better to have a true monetarist policy, just for the experience. 

So Mr. Lawson had to resign.
In the end his move was sparked by remarks in excerpts from Sir Alan's autobiography in The American Economist, a 10,000-circulation academic journal.
But it was the underlying situation that became intolerable. 

What Mr. Major and Mrs. Thatcher will do now remains to be seen.
They confront stubborn inflation and a sagging economy, that is to say, stagflation.
This cannot be solved by provoking a further downturn; reducing the supply of goods does not solve inflation.
Our advice is this: Immediately return the government surpluses to the economy through incentive-maximizing tax cuts, and find some monetary policy target that balances both supply and demand for money (which neither aggregates nor interest rates can do).
This was the version of supply-side economics that, in the late 1970s and early '80s, worked in America and world-wide to solve a far more serious stagflation than afflicts Britain today. 

