.START 

APARTHEID FOES STAGED a massive anti-government rally in South Africa. 

More than 70,000 people filled a soccer stadium on the outskirts of the black township of Soweto and welcomed freed leaders of the outlawed African National Congress.
It was considered South Africa's largest opposition rally.
Walter Sisulu, the ANC's former secretary general who served 26 years in prison before being released two weeks ago, urged peace, negotiation and discipline.
President de Klerk's government permitted the rally, and security forces didn't interfere. 

Pretoria's approval of the demonstration and the ANC's conciliatory tone appeared aimed at setting up negotiations to give blacks political rights. 

CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS BACKED Bush's criticism of Nicaragua's Ortega. 

While lawmakers haven't raised the possibility of renewing military aid to the Contras following Ortega's weekend threat to end a truce, Senate Majority Leader Mitchell said on NBC-TV that Ortega had made "a very unwise move." Minority Leader Dole plans to offer a resolution tomorrow denouncing the Nicaraguan president, whose remarks came during a celebration in Costa Rica marking regional moves to democracy.
Ortega cited renewed attacks by the U.S.backed rebels. 

Lawmakers must decide next month whether the Contras will get so-called humanitarian aid under a bipartisan agreement reached in March. 

Spain's Socialist Party claimed victory in nationwide elections, saying it had retained its parliamentary majority by one seat.
With all the votes counted, a government spokesman said Prime Minister Gonzalez's party won 176 seats in the 350-seat Cortes, or lower house of parliament.
The Socialists held 184 seats going into the balloting. 

Thousands of East Germans attended public rallies organized by the Communist leadership and demanded free speech, controls on the security forces and an end to official privileges.
The gatherings in East Berlin and elsewhere were viewed as part of a government effort to stop activists from staging protests to press their demands.
Dissidents in Czechoslovakia said the nation's pro-democracy movement was growing despite the government's move to crush a protest Saturday in Prague's Wenceslas Square.
More than 10,000 demonstrators had called for free elections and the resignation of Communist Party leader Milos Jakes.
Police detained more than 350 people. 

Federal investigators have determined a metallurgical flaw that developed during the making of an engine disk led to the July crash of a United Airlines jetliner in Sioux City, Iowa, killing 112 people. 

Congress sent to Bush an $8.5 billion military construction bill that cuts spending for new installations by 16%.
The measure also moves more than $450 million in the Pentagon budget to home-state projects from foreign bases. 

U.S. and Soviet officials are to open a new round of talks today aimed at reducing chemical-weapons arsenals amid superpower differences over whether to stop making the gases.
The talks in New York are the first since Bush and Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze unveiled proposals in September to scrap existing weapons. 

Afghan guerrillas bombarded Kabul in a weekend assault that Western diplomats called one of the biggest offensives since the Soviet Union completed a troop withdrawal in February.
The rebels also reportedly tightened a blockade on roads leading to the capital, and government forces shelled a guerrilla-held area in western Afghanistan. 

Lebanon's Christian leader convened an emergency meeting of his cabinet after indications that he might dissolve Parliament in an attempt to scuttle an Arab-sponsored peace plan.
Gen. Michel Aoun rejected the pact because it fails to provide a timetable for a Syrian troop pullout from Lebanon. 

Authorities in Hawaii said the wreckage of a missing commuter plane with 20 people aboard was spotted in a remote valley on the island of Molokai.
There wasn't any evidence of survivors.
The plane failed to reach Molokai's airport Saturday while on a flight from the neighboring island of Maui. 

The Oakland Athletics won baseball's World Series, defeating the San Francisco Giants in a four-game sweep.
An earthquake Oct. 17 in Northern California had caused a 10-day delay midway through the championship contest, which ended Saturday at San Francisco's Candlestick Park. 

Died: Rudolf von Bennigsen-Foerder, 63, chairman of Veba AG of West Germany, in Duesseldorf, of pneumonia. 

