.START 

For the sixth time in as many years, Continental Airlines has a new senior executive.
Gone is D. Joseph Corr, the airline's chairman, chief executive and president, appointed only last December. 

Mr. Corr resigned to pursue other business interests, the airline said.
He could not be reached for comment. 

Succeeding him as chairman and chief executive will be Frank Lorenzo, chairman and chief executive of Continental's parent, Texas Air Corp. Mr. Lorenzo, 49 years old, is reclaiming the job that was his before Mr. Corr signed on. 

The airline also named Mickey Foret as president.
Mr. Foret, 44, is a 15-year veteran of Texas Air and Texas International Airlines, its predecessor.
Most recently he had been executive vice president for planning and finance at Texas Air. 

Top executives at Continental haven't lasted long, especially those recruited from outside.
But Mr. Corr's tenure was shorter than most.
The 48-year-old Mr. Corr was hired largely because he was credited with returning Trans World Airlines Inc. to profitability while he was its president from 1986 to 1988.
Before that, he was an executive with a manufacturing concern. 

At Continental he cut money-losing operations, which helped produce a modest profit in this year's second quarter.
But Mr. Corr, a stunt pilot in his spare time, was understood to be frustrated by what he regarded as limited freedom under Mr. Lorenzo. 

While not officially an executive at Continental during Mr. Corr's tenure, Mr. Lorenzo is known for keeping close tabs on Texas Air's operating units.
Continental is Texas Air's flagship and was built painfully to its present size under Mr. Lorenzo after emerging from bankruptcy proceedings in 1986. 

It's unclear what role, if any, Mr. Lorenzo's recent exploration of a possible sale of a stake in Continental had in Mr. Corr's departure.
One source familiar with the airline said, however, that Mr. Corr wasn't informed in advance during the summer when Mr. Lorenzo began discussions with potential buyers. 

During his tenure, Mr. Corr attempted through a series of meetings to inform managers of some of the company's future plans, traveled widely to talk to employees and backed training sessions designed to improve the carrier's image. 

Mr. Foret is one of a handful of executives Mr. Lorenzo has relied on over the years.
Previously, he had served in financial planning positions at the company's Eastern Airlines unit.
Another longtime ally, Phil Bakes, currently heads Eastern, now in Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.
Mr. Bakes previously had a turn at running Continental. 

Among the other alumni are Stephen Wolf, now chairman of UAL Inc., and Thomas Plaskett, president of Pan Am Corp. 

