.START 

When Michael S. Perry took the podium at a recent cosmetics industry event, more than 500 executives packing the room snapped to attention. 

Mr. Perry, who runs Unilever Group's world-wide personal-care business, paused to scan the crowd. "I see we have about half the audience working for us," he said, tongue in cheek. "The other half, we may have before long." 

Members of the audience gasped or laughed nervously; their industry has been unsettled recently by acquisitions.
First Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch packaged-goods giant, spent $2 billion to acquire brands such as Faberge and Elizabeth Arden.
It now holds the No. 3 position at U.S. department-store cosmetic counters.
Then Procter & Gamble Co. agreed to buy Noxell Corp. for $1.3 billion.
That acquisition, to be completed by year end, will include the Cover Girl and Clarion makeup lines, making P&G the top marketer of cosmetics in mass-market outlets. 

It's not so much the idea of acquisitions that has agitated the cosmetics industry as the companies doing the acquiring: P&G and Unilever bring with them great experience with mundane products like soap and toilet paper, sparking disdain in the glitzy cosmetics trade; but they also bring mammoth marketing clout, sparking fear.
Though it is far from certain that companies best known for selling Promise margarine and Tide detergent will succeed in cosmetics, there's little doubt they will shake up the industry. 

For now, both companies are keeping quiet about their specific plans.
But industry watchers expect them to blend the methodical marketing strategies they use for more mundane products with the more intuitive approach typical of cosmetics companies.
Likely changes include more emphasis on research, soaring advertising budgets and aggressive pricing.
But some cosmetics-industry executives wonder whether techniques honed in packaged goods will translate to the cosmetics business.
Estee Lauder Inc., Revlon Inc. and other cosmetics houses traditionally have considered themselves fashion enterprises whose product development is guided by the creative intuition of their executives.
Cosmetics companies roll out new makeup colors several times a year, and since most products can be easily copied by competitors, they're loath to test them with consumers. 

"Just because upscale cosmetics look like packaged goods and smell like packaged goods, it doesn't mean they are packaged goods," says Leonard Lauder, chief executive of Estee Lauder. "They're really fashion items wrapped up in little jars." 

In contrast to the more artistic nature of traditional cosmetics houses, Unilever and P&G are the habitats of organization men in gray-flannel suits.
Both companies are conservative marketers that rely on extensive market research.
P&G, in particular, rarely rolls out a product nationally before extensive test-marketing.
Both can be extremely aggressive at pricing such products as soaps and diapers -- to the extent that some industry consultants predict cents-off coupons for mascara could result from their entry into the field. 

P&G already has shown it can meld some traditional packaged-goods techniques with the image-making of the cosmetics trade in the mass-market end of the business.
Consider Oil of Olay, which P&G acquired as part of Richardson-Vicks International in 1985.
The moisturizer, introduced in 1962, had a dowdy image. "Oil of Olay brought with it the baggage of being used basically by older women who had already aged," says David Williams, a consultant with New England Consulting Group. 

P&G set out to reposition the brand by broadening the product line to include facial cleansers and moisturizers for sensitive skin.
It also redesigned Oil of Olay's packaging, stamping the traditional pink boxes with gold lines to create a more opulent look.
Moreover, P&G shifted its ad campaign from one targeting older women to one featuring a woman in her mid-30s vowing "not to grow old gracefully." The company says sales have soared. 

Goliaths like Unilever and P&G have enormous financial advantages over smaller rivals.
Next year, Noxell plans to roll out a perfume called Navy, says George L. Bunting Jr., chairman of Noxell.
Without P&G's backing, Noxell might not have been able to spend the estimated $5 million to $7 million needed to accomplish that without scrimping on its existing brands.
Packaged-goods companies "will make it tougher for smaller people to remain competitive," Mr. Bunting says. 

Further consolidations in the industry could follow.
Rumors that Unilever is interested in acquiring Schering-Plough Corp. 's Maybelline unit are widespread.
Unilever won't comment; Schering, however, denies the brand is for sale. 

The presence of Unilever and P&G is likely to increase the impact of advertising on cosmetics.
While the two are among the world's biggest advertisers, most makers of upscale cosmetics spend relatively little on national ads.
Instead, they focus on events in department stores and pour their promotional budgets into gifts that go along with purchases.
Estee Lauder, for example, spends only an estimated 5% of sales on advertising in the U.S., and Mr. Lauder says he has no plans to change his strategy. 

The most dramatic changes, however, probably will come in new-product development.
Nearly 70% of cosmetics sales come through mass-distribution outlets such as drug stores and supermarkets, according to Andrew Shore, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.
That figure has been inching up for several years.
As the trend continues, demand for mass-market items that are high quality but only mid-priced -- particularly skin-care products -- is expected to increase.
This fall, for example, L'Oreal Group, ordinarily a high-end line, rolled out a drug-store line of skin-care products called Plenitude, which retail for $5 to $15. 

The packaged-goods marketers may try filling that gap with a spate of new products.
Unlike the old-line cosmetics houses, Unilever and P&G both have enormous research and development bases to draw on for new products.
P&G, in fact, is noted for gaining market leadership by introducing products that offer a technical edge over the competition.
Sales of its Tide detergent soared earlier this year, for example, after P&G introduced a version that includes a bleach safe for all colors and fabrics. 

That's led industry executives to speculate that future product development will be driven more by technological innovation than by fashion whims -- especially among mass-market brands. "There will be more emphasis on quality," says Guy Peyrelongue, chief executive of Cosmair Inc., the U.S. licensee of L'Oreal. "You'll see fewer gimmicks." 

But success for Unilever and P&G is far from guaranteed, as shown by the many consumer-product companies that have tried and failed to master the quirky beauty business.
In the 1970s, several pharmaceutical and packaged-goods companies, including Colgate-Palmolive Co., Eli Lilly & Co., Pfizer Inc. and Schering-Plough acquired cosmetics companies.
Industry consultants say only Schering-Plough, which makes the mass-market Maybelline, has maintained a meaningful business.
Colgate, which acquired Helena Rubenstein in 1973, sold the brand seven years later after the brand languished. 

Unilever already has experienced some disappointment.
The mass-market Aziza brand, which it acquired in 1987 along with Chesebrough-Pond's Inc., has lost share, according to industry analysts. 

The ritzy world of department-store cosmetics retailing, where Unilever is concentrating its efforts, may prove even more treacherous.
In this niche, makeup colors change seasonally because they are linked to ready-to-wear fashions.
Because brand loyalty is weak and most cosmetics purchases are unplanned, careful training of store sales staffs by cosmetics companies is important.
And cultivating a luxury image strong enough to persuade consumers to pay more than $15 for lipstick or eye makeup requires a subtle touch that packaged-goods companies have yet to demonstrate on their own. 

