.START 

Well, the arrogant East Coast media have spoken again ("Going for the Green," editorial, Oct. 17).
Having resided in the great state of California for the past seven years, I find it hard to ignore our environmental problems when I start my commute to work with eyes tearing and head aching from the polluted air; when I try to enjoy the beaches and come home covered with tar and oil; when I hear of numerous deaths related to irresponsible processing of cheese and use of chemicals in fruit growing. 

Perhaps it's entertaining for those like you to discount the concerns of environmentalists, suggesting that their save-the-earth initiatives are "whacky" and referring to so many citizens as "la-la activists." Strange that we don't hear similar criticisms of the East Coast activists who seek to clean up Boston Harbor or rid their beaches of medical waste. 

While there are no easy low-cost solutions, simply ignoring our problems will result in their severity increasing and spreading throughout the state, the nation and the world.
If nothing else, such initiatives as these will provide an awareness to citizens and lawmakers and encourage appropriate corrective action. 

Before your next California-bashing editorial, please spend more time out here witnessing the situation -- it just may change your view. 

John Barry 

Ventura, Calif. 

I realize you were just looking for something snotty to say about California and its environmental movement, but picking Frank Lloyd Wright to say it for you was a bad call.
Wright's organic architecture demonstrated a keen sensitivity to the environment decades before it became fashionable among "la-la activists." Indeed, Wright said all his life that the greatest lessons he learned were derived from the study of nature.
Obviously, it's lost on you that about 75% of the American people these days (and in fact the president of the United States) consider themselves environmentalists. 

As for California being a state run by liberal environmental loonies, let's not forget where Ronald Reagan came from.
Perhaps Mr. Reagan, who claimed that air pollution is caused by trees, is the man you should be quoting to back up your position that economics is more important than the Earth.
But it was Frank Lloyd Wright who said, "Is this not Anti-Christ?
The Moloch that knows no God but more?" 

Robert Borden 

Santa Monica, Calif. 

Your editorial was commendable and neatly matched by the readers' comments in letters to the editor, "Alar: Scaring on the Side of Caution." The illogic and inaccuracy of John H. Adams's comments for the National Resources Defense Council fully justifies your characterization of California's Greens in particular as "la-la activists." We may all hope that California's voters will heed the scientific realities that their own university's renowned Prof. Tom Jukes provides them and ignore the charlatanry profferred by their "wealthy Hollywood weepers." 

I have a different approach to offer, not only to Californians, but to all Americans.
In a free country, the law should restrict citizens as little as is consistent with good manners and public safety.
Would-be naysayers should have the burden of proving reasonable necessity when they urge a prohibition for enactment into law. 

W. Brown Morton Jr. 

Warsaw, Va. 

The 170 airlines in the International Air Transport Association last year posted group net profit of $2.5 billion on revenue of $125.1 billion. 

According to the association's annual report, scheduled to be released today in Warsaw, IATA members haven't posted such a strong performance since the late 1970s.
Revenue last year increased by more than 11% over 1988, and net income nearly tripled from restated year-earlier net of $900 million. 

The group attributed the strong results to the favorable economic climate, rising demand for air travel and improved average yield (revenue received per ton of traffic transported a kilometer).
Systemwide, IATA airlines carried 632 million passengers last year, 2% more than in 1987.
But passenger-kilometers, the distance flown while carrying people, increased 5.3% in 1988. 

The association said that lack of airport and air space capacity is the biggest problem facing the airline industry. 

The KGB has abolished a unit known for persecuting dissidents, the government newspaper Izvestia said.
The newspaper quoted KGB chairman Vladimir A. Kryuchkov as saying the definition of anti-Soviet crimes had narrowed, the laws had changed and people no longer have to fear a simple slip of the tongue.
Mr. Kryuchkov was quoted as saying that in place of the infamous 5th Directorate a new unit would work "to foil the conspiracies of foreign intelligence services to create and use organized anti-government groups in our country." 

Czechoslovakia has restricted consumer-goods exports to neighbor countries because of "massive buying out of food" by tourists from Poland, Hungary and the Soviet Union, the Rude Pravo daily said.
Rising inflation in Poland and Hungary makes Czechoslovak food, clothing and shoes relatively cheap for visitors from these countries.
The paper gave no details of what the restrictions would entail but said the measures were necessary to protect the domestic market. 

West Germany's biggest union, IG Metall, said it is ready to back demands for more pay and shorter hours with strikes against the nation's automotive, steel and engineering industries.
Its chairman told the union to prepare for the worst in next year's confrontation with employers over a new three-year wage deal.
A major goal is to cut the working week to 35 hours from the present 37. 

Last week came news of alarm in Venice over a plan to tap gas fields off the city's coast.
Now comes word from a scientist that over the next century Venice will sink nearly three times faster than the present rate because of the "greenhouse effect." "Global warming means higher tides which will lower Venice by another 23 inches in the next 100 years," Giovanni Cecconi of the the New Venice Consortium said.
The consortium of scientists and companies was set up by Italy to help preserve the fabled city of canals.
Venice has sunk 10 inches in this century. 

West Germany's Quelle said it will establish a mail-order operation with two local partners in the Soviet Union next year.
Saying this is a first for a Western company, West Germany's largest mail-order group said the newly established Moscow-based Intermoda company is scheduled to begin operations in February 1990.
Intermoda will initially only send the textile and clothing section of the Quelle catalog, translated into Russian, to Soviet customers who have access to convertible currency. 

The European Community Commission has imposed provisional anti-dumping duties on imports of South Korean small-screen color-television sets. 

Saying that a surge in low-priced imports had damaged EC producers' profits and led to job losses, the commission imposed a duty of 10.2% on TVs made by Daewoo, a duty of 12.3% on Goldstar Co., 13% on Samsung and 19.6% on TVs made by other South Korean producers. 

The commission said that EC television producers lost "important market shares" and suffered an "unsustainable" pressure on prices because of the Korean companies' marketing and pricing policies, which it said were "in clear violation" of international trade rules. 

In other news concerning South Korea's television industry, Samsung signed an agreement with Soyuz, the external-trade organization of the Soviet Union, to swap Korean television sets and videocassette recorders for pig iron from the Soviet Union.
South Korea and the Soviet Union have no diplomatic relations but exchanged trade offices earlier this year. 

Sri Lanka, where more than 15,000 people have died in six years of ethnic turmoil, said it will ban sex and violence from state-owned television next year. "Many programs we have now come from the West and are not suitable to our culture," a government minister said.
A star attraction on the national network is the U.S.'s "Dynasty." . . . A poll of South Koreans showed overwhelming opposition to efforts to curb dog-meat consumption just because it offends foreigners. 

