.START 

Among the things I learned covering the World Series these past few weeks is that the Richter scale, which measures earthquakes, isn't like the one in your bathroom.
A quake that measures two on the Richter isn't twice as severe as a "one" -- it's 10 times worse.
A "three" is 10 times 10 again, and so on.
That put the "seven" of Oct. 17 in perspective for me.
Think I'll buy one of those "I Survived" T-shirts after all. 

By Richterian standards, the show that the Oakland Athletics put on Friday and Saturday nights, in putting a mercifully swift end to the game's Longest Short Series, rated somewhere between a 10 and an 11.
The boys with the white elephants on their sleeves might not have made the earth move much, but they certainly did some impressive things with baseballs. 

The Pale Pachyderms propelled six of 'em out of the unfriendly confines of Candlestick Park during the two games en route to 13-7 and 9-6 wins over the San Francisco Giants.
Combined with their two pre-quake victories, way back on Oct. 14 and 15 (the scores were 5-0 and 5-1, remember?), that gave them a sweep of the best-of-seven series. 

The joke here is that the Giants lost by de fault.
That's geologically correct, but a trifle unfair otherwise.
They showed up, but didn't -- or couldn't -- challenge. 

They led for nary an inning in the four games, and managed to stir their fans only once.
That came in the seventh inning of Game Four when, trailing 8-2, they scored four times and brought their big heat -- Will Clark and Kevin Mitchell -- to the plate with one out and a runner on.
But Clark flied out to short right field and Mitchell's drive to left was caught on the warning track by Rickey Henderson as 62,000 sets of lungs exhaled as one. 

"I went out to Todd {Burns, the A's reliever} and told him that we weren't gonna let this guy beat us," said Oakland catcher Terry Steinbach of the decisive confrontation with Mitchell, the National League's reigning home-run king. "I told him to make Mitchell reach for everything, and that's what we did.
The ball he hit wasn't a strike.
If it had been, he mighta hit it out." 

But if the A's hadn't won in four, they would have prevailed in five, or six, or seven.
The best team won this Series, which is more unusual than it may sound.
Baseball ain't football, where the good teams beat up on the bad ones.
The best baseball teams win six of 10 games and the worst win four of 10.
Without becoming overly contentious, allow me to suggest that several recent champions of the world according to us (as in U.S.) might not have ranked No. 1 in many polls.
That list includes last season's champs, the Los Angeles Dodgers, who rode a miracle home run by Kirk Gibson and two faultless pitching performances by Orel Hershiser to a five-game triumph over a bewitched, bothered Oakland crew. 

These A's, however, got few grades as low as B on their 1989 report card.
They led the Major Leagues in regular-season wins with 99 and flattened the Toronto Blue Jays four games to one for the American League pennant before stomping their cross-bay rivals.
The pithiest testimony to their domination of the just-concluded tournament came from Giants' manager Roger Craig after his team had fallen in Game Three to a five-home-run barrage that tied a 61-year-old Series record.
Asked what he would do differently on the morrow, Craig allowed that he might play his outfielders deeper, "maybe on the other side of the fence." 

The A's offensive showing in the Series got an A, as in awesome.
Their 85 total bases broke a record for a four-game set, and their nine home runs tied one.
Eight Oakland players hit homers, with centerfielder Dave Henderson getting two, both on Friday.
Rickey Henderson, the do-everything leadoff man, had nine hits and set or tied four-game Series marks for triples (2) and stolen bases (3). 

The sole A not to homer was cleanup hitter Mark McGwire, their regular-season leader with 33, and he contributed five hits plus a diving fielding play on a ground ball in Game Three that stopped a Giant rally while the issue still was in doubt. "Think I'll redo my image -- get this changed to a glove," quipped the big first baseman Saturday night, fingering the gold bat he wears on a neck chain. 

Even with that power show, though, the Oakland Series' star, certified by the Most Valuable Player award, was a pitcher, Dave Stewart.
He shut out the Giants on five hits in Game One, and allowed three runs on five hits in seven innings Friday after the 12-day break caused by the earthquake. 

Stewart's honor was a nice note on a couple of grounds.
One was that, despite his 62 regular-season wins over the past three seasons in the Land Beyond the Late News, he has been overshadowed by his more-muscular mates and missed out on prizes that might have been his due.
The other is that he's an Oakland native, and lifted residents' spirits by his visits to quake-hit areas last week. 

Afterward, as the A's toasted their victory with beer (they dispensed with traditional champagne showers in deference to the quake victims), Stewart said he thought his championship-team ring would outshine his individual trophy. "Give me four or five more Series with these guys, and I don't care if I ever win a Cy Young," he said, in reference to baseball's best-pitcher award. 

Indeed, the possibility of an A's ring cycle, a/k/a a dynasty, was a major topic of post-game discussion Saturday, so much so that Sandy Alderson, the team's general manager, felt obliged to dampen it. "People change, teams change," he cautioned. "It's easier to get worse than better in this game." 

He might have added an interesting historical fact: The last Series sweep, by the Cincinnati Reds, came in 1976, which also was the first year of baseball player free agency.
It was widely predicted that free agency would allow the glamorous, "big market" teams to monopolize the best talent, but quite the opposite has occurred: Twelve different clubs have won titles in the 14 seasons since its advent.
The number includes such unstylish burgs as, well, Oakland. 

