.START 

If a TV weatherman gets butterflies facing the camera again after a questionable forecast, Donald H. Straszheim surely understands.
The chief economist of Merrill Lynch & Co. finds himself in such a position as he buzzes the Midwest on his first road trip since backpedaling on a major prediction. 

Mr. Straszheim expects he will take some heat, and he's right.
Since the last time he traveled this way several months ago, he has recanted a series of bold forecasts of a recession.
In February 1988, for example, Merrill Lynch's weekly commentary announced that "the economy is likely to fall into recession in early 1989." 

The forecasts were widely disseminated, and, in a splashy ad campaign launched in the summer of 1988, Merrill Lynch urged investors to buy bonds.
It said long-term interest rates, then above 9%, could drop to 7% by the end of 1989, so bonds, which benefit from falling rates, would be a good buy.
The firm also raised the percentage of bonds in its model portfolio from 40% to 45% and later to 55%. 

But this September -- just when many market economists, including some at Merrill Lynch, believed that Mr. Straszheim was about to be proved right -- he took a detour if not a U-turn.
He softened the talk about a recession.
Now, in fact, he is predicting economic growth of 2.9% this year and 2.1% next year, a more optimistic outlook than the consensus of some four dozen top forecasters surveyed by Blue Chip Economic Indicators newsletter. 

And, just recently, Merrill Lynch cut the recommended bondholdings back to 50%.
While such changes might sound minor, they aren't: Merrill Lynch manages or oversees some $300 billion in retail accounts that include everything from mutual funds to individual annuities. 

Two well-known colleagues who believe Mr. Straszheim was right the first time are David Bostian Jr. and A. Gary Shilling, both of whom run their own New York research firms.
Mr. Bostian said in August that his macroeconomic index signaled recession.
Mr. Shilling, who was Merrill Lynch's chief economist from 1967 to 1971, has heralded a recession for months. "My own personal opinion is that Don threw in the towel just about the time he should have doubled his bet," he says. 

Now a rocky stock market and weak corporate profits may further threaten the economy.
And Mr. Straszheim conceded after a recent drop in manufacturing jobs that "it may prove to be the case that we got whipsawed -- that we pulled the recession forecast at just the wrong time." He adds, "That's the forecasting business." 

However risky the business, it's brisk these days.
Pestered by bosses, brokers, clients and media people and pushed by their own egos, Wall Street economists are forecasting about everything from broad economic trends to the dinkiest monthly indicator.
But the surprisingly durable seven-year economic expansion has made mincemeat of more than one forecast. 

This isn't the quiet economic science practiced in the universities.
This is the commercial version. 

Carrying the new message on the road, Mr. Straszheim meets confrontation that often occurs in inverse proportion to the size of the client.
No sophisticated professional expects economists to be right all the time.
Some smaller clients don't seem to notice his switch.
But with some clients, the talk can heat up a bit. 

Dennis O'Brien, the treasurer of Commonwealth Edison Co. in Chicago, adopts a polite approach, waiting for an opportunity to ask about the forecast.
A good half-hour into breakfast at the Palmer House, Mr. O'Brien looks up from his plate after Mr. Straszheim says something about people who believe interest rates are about to nosedive. "I'm one of them who hope they will, with $6 billion in debt on the books.
Is that the forecast?" Mr. O'Brien asks, trying to pin down the economist.
He doesn't fully succeed, although Mr. Straszheim lists an array of interest-rate scenarios. 

In a chilly conference room at Alliance Capital Management in Minneapolis, in contrast, the firm's money managers seem ready to pin Mr. Straszheim to the wall.
Alfred Harrison, the manager, shoves Mr. Straszheim's handout back at him: "Do we want to go through this?
Or can we ask you why you changed your forecast just when it's about to be right?" 

Swiveling in his chair, Mr. Straszheim replies that the new outlook, though still weak, doesn't justify calling a recession right now. "It's all in this handout you don't want to look at.
We could still have a recession" at some point.
One of Mr. Straszheim's recurring themes is that the state of the economy isn't a simple black or white.
Sometimes, like now, it's gray. 

This somewhat-ambiguous assessment moves one Alliance portfolio manager to ask: "So, what is this -- a Stealth recession?" Another challenges Merrill Lynch's bond recommendation last year. "We're not running that ad campaign any more," Mr. Straszheim snaps in a rare show of irritation.
He adds, "I think it was a fairly decent call." 

Explaining his change of mind, Mr. Straszheim says later, "It's hard to pin this on one factor." He says the economy, and especially the employment numbers, look much better than he expected; interest rates have generally declined; inflation hasn't run amok. "Our business is constantly looking at all these things," he says.
His new forecast calls for "a soft landing." And it may be right, judging from last week's report that inflation-adjusted gross national product rose at a 2.5% annual rate in the third quarter. 

Mr. Shilling understands Mr. Straszheim's problems. "There's unbelievable pressure on economists to forecast these numbers," he says. "You make a forecast, and then you become its prisoner." 

It is indeed hard to back away from a widely publicized forecast, and Mr. Straszheim is fidgeting with the handcuffs on this trip.
His approach to the recantation is direct but low-key. "For some time, we had forecast negative third- and fourth-quarter growth.
We pulled that forecast," he begins matter-of-factly in a meeting with Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood Inc. officials in Minneapolis, the first stop. 

