.START 

In the aftermath of the Beijing massacre on June 4, economists advanced wildly divergent views on how Hong Kong would be affected. 

Among the most upbeat was BT Brokerage (Asia) Ltd.
In a June 5 reaction, the Bankers Trust Co. unit proclaimed the economy "shockproof." 

Others were more cautious.
In a July analysis titled "From Euphoria to Despair," W.I. Carr (Far East) Ltd., another securities firm, said that eroding confidence might undermine future economic development. 

Today, with business activity in Hong Kong staggering along at an uneven pace, the economy itself seems locked in a struggle between hope and fear. 

Manufacturers have survived the turmoil in China largely unscathed.
Signs of revival seem evident in Hong Kong's hard-hit hotel sector.
But in the stock and real-estate markets, activity remains spotty even though prices have regained much of their lost ground.
Waning demand reported by importers, retailers and even fancy restaurants all reinforce a profile of a community that is sharply tightening its belt. 

As many economists and businessmen see it, those incongruities underscore a paradox that seems likely to bedevil the economy throughout the 1990s.
That paradox is Hong Kong's economically rewarding yet politically perilous relationship with China. 

As a model of capitalist efficiency on southern China's doorstep, Hong Kong's prospects look good.
China's land and labor offer inexpensive alternatives to local industry.
China-bound freight streams through the territory's port.
In the decade since the communist nation emerged from isolation, its burgeoning trade with the West has lifted Hong Kong's status as a regional business center.
These benefits seem secure despite China's current economic and political troubles.
But to Hong Kong, China isn't purely business.
It is also the sovereign power that, come 1997, will take over this British colony.
China's leaders have promised generous liberties for post-1997 Hong Kong.
That promise sounds shaky now that those same leaders have fallen back on Marxist dogma and brute force to crush their nation's democracy movement. 

Outflows of people and capital from Hong Kong have been growing since the sovereignty issue first arose in the early 1980s.
A widely held assumption all along has been that, given its robust economy, Hong Kong will be able to attract sufficient foreign money and talent to comfortably offset the outflows.
With interest in emigration and investment abroad soaring since June 4, that assumption no longer seems so safe. 

Investment and emigration plans take time to come to fruition.
Only four months have passed since the Beijing massacre, and few are prepared to predict its ultimate impact.
The only consensus is that more money and people may leave Hong Kong than had been thought likely.
This expected blow has cast a pall over the economy's prospects.
The question, as many people see it, is how long such uncertainty will last. 

Maureen Fraser, an economist with W.I. Carr, a subsidiary of France's Banque Indosuez, believes that the territory may not be able to regain its momentum until some time after 1997.
It may experience an upswing or two in between.
But with local investors shaken by China's political and economic turmoil, she says, a genuine recovery may not arrive until Hong Kong can prove itself secure under Chinese sovereignty. 

"Investors have to accept the possibility of a significant slowdown in economic activity in the runup to 1997," she says. "Over the next few years, I would advise caution." 

In a soon-to-be published book on the territory, a political economist, Miron Mushkat, has derived three future scenarios from interviews with 41 Hong Kong government officials and businessmen.
Nearly half of them argue that Hong Kong's uneasy relationship with China will constrain -- though not inhibit -- long-term economic growth.
The rest are split roughly between optimists who expect Hong Kong to hum along as before and pessimists who foresee irreparable chaos. 

The interviews took place two years ago.
Since the China crisis erupted, Mr. Mushkat says, the scenario as depicted by the middle-of-the-road group bears a remarkable resemblance to the difficulties Hong Kong currently faces.
The consensus of this group, which he dubs "realists," is that the local economy will grow through the 1990s at annual rates averaging between 3% and 5%. 

Such a pace of growth, though respectable for mature industrialized economies, would be unusually slow for Hong Kong.
Only twice since the 1960s has annual gross domestic product growth here fallen below 5% for two or more consecutive years.
The first instance occurred in 1967-68, when China's Cultural Revolution triggered bloody street rioting in the colony.
The other came in 1974-75 from the combined shock of world recession and a severe local stock market crash.
During the past 10 years, Hong Kong's economic growth has averaged 8.3% annually.
Given Hong Kong's record, Mr. Mushkat's "realists" might have sounded unduly conservative when the interviews took place two years ago.
Under the current circumstances, he says, their scenario no longer seems unrealistic. 

"The city could lose some of its entrepreneurial flavor.
It could lose some of its dynamism," says Mr. Mushkat, a director of Baring Securities (Hong Kong) Ltd., a unit of Britain's Barings PLC. "It doesn't have to be a disaster.
It just means that Hong Kong would become a less exciting place." 

Going by official forecasts of GDP, which measures the colony's output of goods and services, minus foreign income, Mr. Mushkat's "realists" seem relatively close to the mark.
After taking into account the fallout from the China crisis, the government has projected 1989 GDP growth of 5%.
The updated forecast, published Aug. 25, compares with an earlier forecast of 6% published March 1 and a 7.4% rate achieved in 

Sir Piers Jacobs, Hong Kong's financial secretary, says a further downward revision may be justified unless the economy stages a more convincing rally. "We aren't looking at anything like a doomsday scenario," he says. "But clearly we're entering a difficult period." 

Many factors besides a dread of 1997 will have a bearing on Hong Kong's economy.
One concerns Japanese investors.
Barely visible on Hong Kong's property scene in 1985, by last year Japan had become the top foreign investor, spending $602 million.
The market has grown relatively quiet since the China crisis.
But if the Japanese return in force, their financial might could compensate to some extent for local investors' waning commitment. 

Another -- and critical -- factor is the U.S., Hong Kong's biggest export market.
Even before the China crisis, weak U.S. demand was slowing local economic growth.
Conversely, strong consumer spending in the U.S. two years ago helped propel the local economy at more than twice its current rate. 

Indeed, a few economists maintain that global forces will continue to govern Hong Kong's economic rhythm.
Once external conditions, such as U.S. demand, swing in the territory's favor, they argue, local businessmen will probably overcome their 1997 worries and continue doing business as usual. 

But economic arguments, however solid, won't necessarily impress Hong Kong's 5.7 million people.
Many are refugees, having fled China's unending cycles of political repression and poverty since the Communist Party took power in 1949.
As a result, many of those now planning to leave Hong Kong can't easily be swayed by momentary improvements in the colony's political and economic climate. 

Emigration applications soared in 1985, when Britain and China ratified their accord on Hong Kong's future.
In 1987, Hong Kong's most prosperous year for a decade, 30,000 left, up 58% from the previous year.
Last year, 45,000 went.
The government predicts that annual outflows will level off over the next few years at as much as 60,000 -- a projection that is widely regarded as unrealistically low.
A large number of those leaving are managers and professionals.
While no one professes to know the exact cost of such a "brain drain" to the economy, hardly anyone doubts that it poses a threat. 

"When the economy loses a big portion of its work force that also happens to include its most productive members, economic growth is bound to be affected," says Anthong Wong, an economist with Hang Seng Bank. 

