.START 

When the economy stumbled in the mid-1970s, Akzo NV fell out of bed. 

Towering overcapacity in the synthetic fiber business, which accounted for half of the Dutch chemical company's sales, led to huge losses and left Akzo's survival in doubt.
It wasn't until the early 1980s that Akzo nursed itself back to health. 

Now, as a new downturn in the chemical industry looms, Akzo says it is in far better shape to cope.
Investment analysts generally agree. 

Aside from slashing costs and investing heavily in its plants, Akzo has spent 3.9 billion guilders ($1.88 billion) on acquisitions since 1983 to give it better balance.
During the same period, the company has sold about 1.6 billion guilders of assets. 

The fibers business, whose products go into textiles, carpeting and myriad industrial uses, now accounts for only 20% of Akzo's sales. "We have definitely become less cyclical," Syb Bergsma, executive vice president-finance, said in an interview. 

Still, Akzo hasn't yet found a way to achieve another goal: a large presence in the U.S. market for prescription drugs.
Mr. Bergsma said prices for U.S. pharmaceutical companies remain too high, making it unlikely that Akzo will pursue any major acquisitions in that area.
But he said Akzo is considering "alliances" with American drug companies, although he wouldn't elaborate. 

An indication of Akzo's success in reshaping itself will come Thursday when it reports third-quarter results.
Analysts expect the company to show profit of about 225 million guilders, up 9% from 206.3 million guilders a year earlier. 

A bigger test will come next year if, as many analysts expect, bulk chemical prices slump in Europe. 

"Maybe Akzo can surprise the investment world a bit," said Jaap Visker, an analyst at Amsterdam-Rotterdam Bank NV.
He figures Akzo is likely to be one of the few major chemical companies to show profit growth next year.
The bank projects Akzo will show per-share earnings of 24 guilders in 1990, up from an estimated 22.5 guilders for this year and the 20.9 guilders reported for 1988. 

At James Capel & Co. in London, analyst Jackie Ashurst notes that Akzo is less exposed than many of its rivals to the most volatile chemical products.
For example, Akzo has only minor petrochemical operations, is small in plastics and doesn't make fertilizers. 

Thus, while Akzo profited less than many rivals from the boom of recent years in petrochemicals and plastics, it has less to fear from the current slump. 

The company is exposed to bulk chemicals, however.
Although bulk-chemical prices have begun falling in the U.S., they are generally stable in Europe, Mr. Bergsma said.
A decline may come in the first half of 1990, he said, but the market doesn't appear on the verge of a severe downturn. 

To reduce the danger of such pricing cycles, Akzo has invested heavily in specialty chemicals, which have highly specific industrial uses and tend to produce much higher profit margins than do bulk chemicals.
Akzo's biggest move in this area was the 1987 acquisition of Stauffer Chemical Co. 's specialty chemical business for $625 million. 

In a less glamorous field, Akzo is the world's biggest producer of industrial salt, used as a raw material for the chemical industry as well as for such tasks as melting ice.
Akzo also makes products derived from salt, such as chlorine and caustic soda. 

In the fibers division, profit remains weak, largely because of persistent overcapacity.
But Akzo is still slimming down: It recently announced plans to eliminate about 1,700 fiber-related jobs in the Netherlands and West Germany. 

Although the polyester and rayon markets remain mostly bleak, Akzo has high hopes for some emerging fiber businesses, such carbon fibers and aramid, extremely strong fibers used to reinforce tires and metals and to make such products as bullet-proof vests. 

Akzo's Twaron aramid fiber is a distant second to Du Pont Co. 's Kevlar, which dominates the market.
Mr. Bergsma said world-wide industry sales of aramid fibers are expected to total about $500 million this year.
Sales growth of 10% a year seems possible, he said, and Akzo expects its Twaron business to become profitable in 1990. 

Akzo also has spent heavily on acquisitions in paints, auto finishes and industrial coatings.
In August, for example, it completed the $110 million acquisition of Reliance Universal Inc., a U.S. maker of industrial coatings for wood, metals and plastics, from Tyler Corp. Mr. Bergsma said Akzo is likely to see strong profit growth from coatings as it realizes cost savings and other benefits from its greater scale. 

For Akzo's drug business, where profits have shown litle change for the past five years, Mr. Bergsma predicted moderate profit growth.
Akzo is the leading seller of birth-control pills in Europe but is still seeking regulatory approvals to enter that market in the U.S. and Japan.
Mr. Bergsma said Akzo hopes to have approval to sell its Marvelon pill in the U.S. in 1992. 

Akzo also has small operations in diagnostic tests, generic drugs and veterinary products.
Veterinary products are showing especially strong growth, Mr. Bergsma said.
Among the leading products is a flu shot for horses. 

