.START 

Since its founding in 1818, Brooks Brothers, the standard-bearer of the Ivy League look, has eschewed flashy sales promotions and fashion trends -- the rules that most retailers live by.
But with sales growth sluggish and other men's stores putting on the heat, the venerable retailer can no longer afford such a smug attitude. 

So two weeks ago, thousands of Brooks Brothers charge customers -- customers conditioned to wait for twice-yearly clearance sales -- got a surprise: an invitation to come in and buy any one item for 25% off.
During the four-day promotion, shoppers at the Short Hills, N.J., store lined up to pay for big-ticket items like coats and suits. 

That's not all.
Departing from its newspaper ads featuring prim sketches of a suit or a coat, Brooks Brothers is marketing an updated image in a new campaign that carries the slogan, "The Surprise of Brooks Brothers." One color photo displays a rainbow of dress shirts tied in a knot; another picture shows neckties with bold designs.
The message is loud and clear: This is not your father's Brooks Brothers. 

As part of its national ad pitch, Brooks Brothers will show less preppy women's clothes, moving away from its floppy-tie business stereotype.
One ad shows a bright red jacket paired with a black leather skirt.
And the ad copy is cheeky: "How can you be a Wall Street hot shot without at least one Brooks Brothers suit in your portfolio?" 

Brooks Brothers hopes that shaking its time-honored traditions will attract more young men and more women and change consumer perceptions about its range of merchandise. "We have men who only buy their shirts and underwear here or younger customers who only buy their {job} interview suit here," says William Roberti, chairman and chief executive officer of Brooks Brothers. "We want them to buy more of their wardrobe here." Industry watchers agree that Brooks Brothers is long overdue in updating its buttoned-down image, which has stunted its growth.
When acquired in May 1988 by British retailer Marks & Spencer PLC, Brooks Brothers' annual operating profit was about $41.8 million on sales of $290.1 million.
Mr. Roberti concedes that since the $750 million takeover, "sales growth hasn't been dramatic." For the 11 months ended March 31, operating profit at the 52-store chain totaled $40.5 million on sales of $286.8 million. 

As Brooks Brothers jumps into the fashion fray, it will be playing catch up.
Many clothiers, especially Ralph Lauren, have cashed in on the recent popularity of updated Ivy League and English styles.
In keeping with men's broader fashion scope today, businessmen are dabbling in English and Italian suits that are conservative but not stodgy.
The rigid Ivy League customer, Brooks Brothers' bread and butter, meanwhile is becoming extinct.
Thus, Brooks Brothers has lost customers to stores that offer more variety such as Paul Stuart, Barneys New York and Louis, Boston. 

"Brooks Brothers no longer has a lock on the {Ivy League} customer who is status-conscious about his clothes," says Charlie Davidson, president of the Andover Shop, a traditional men's store in Cambridge, Mass. 

By making a break from tradition, Brooks Brothers is seeking a delicate balance.
If it promotes fashion too much, the shop risks alienating its old-line customers; by emphasizing "value," it risks watering down its high-minded mystique. 

Fashion industry consultants also question whether the company can make significant strides in its women's business, given that its customer base is less established and that conservative business dress for women is on the decline.
Brooks Brothers' aim is for 20% of total sales to come from the women's department, up from the current 12%. 

"Everybody forgets that there are fashion cycles in classic merchandise," observes Carol Farmer, a retail consultant. "For women, dressing for success in a real structured way is over." 

Despite these challenges, Marks & Spencer sees big potential in Brooks Brothers, noting the widely recognized name and global presence.
Marks & Spencer plans to open roughly 18 more U.S. stores in the next five years.
Brooks Brothers says business is robust at its 30 outlets in Japan and two shops in Hong Kong.
Marks & Spencer is also considering opening stores across Europe sometime in the future. 

Alan Smith, president of Marks & Spencer North America and Far East, says that Brooks Brothers' focus is to boost sales by broadening its merchandise assortment while keeping its "traditional emphasis." The British parent is also streamlining: Brooks Brothers, which continues to make almost all of its merchandise, recently shut one of its two shirt plants in Paterson, N.J., and has closed boys' departments in all but 20 stores. 

Brooks Brothers is also remodeling its stores.
Wednesday, it will unveil a $7 million refurbishing at its flagship store on Madison Avenue.
With newly installed escalators, the store retains its signature wood-and-brass look but is less intimidating.
More shirts and sweaters will be laid out on tables, instead of sitting behind glass cases, so that customers can "walk up and touch them," Mr. Roberti says. 

Because the biggest growth in menswear is in casual sportswear, Brooks Brothers is chasing more of that business.
The entire second floor of its Madison Avenue store is now casual sportswear featuring items such as ski sweaters, leather backpacks and a $42 wool baseball hat with the store's crest. 

The centerpiece of the overhaul, according to Mr. Roberti, is the men's tailored clothing department, where Brooks Brothers has added new suit styles and fabrics. "The perception out there is that we are very conservative and we only sell one type of suit," Mr. Roberti says, referring to Brooks Brothers' signature three-button "sack suit," with a center-vented jacket and boxy fit. 

But it now offers more two-button versions and suits with a tapered fit.
It also plans to add suits cut for athletic men with broader upper bodies.
Next spring, nearly 30% of its suits will have pleated pants, compared with virtually none a couple of years ago. 

Says Mr. Roberti: "We want to turn the customer on." 

