.START 

When Anne Volokh and her family immigrated to the U.S. 14 years ago, they started life in Los Angeles with only $400.
They'd actually left the Soviet Union with $480, but during a stop in Italy Ms. Volokh dropped $80 on a black velvet suit.
Not surprisingly, she quickly adapted to the American way.
Three months after she arrived in L.A. she spent $120 she didn't have for a hat. ("A turban," she specifies, "though it wasn't the time for that 14 years ago.
But I loved turbans.") 

Since then she has become wealthy.
Her husband and older son -- a computer prodigy profiled in The Wall Street Journal in 1981, when he was 13 -- run a software company with expected sales this year of $10 million.
Most recently, she has become the publisher of Movieline, a four-year-old Los Angeles magazine that began national distribution last month, with an initial press run of 100,000 copies.
Distributed by the Hearst Corp. 's Eastern News, the glossy publication melds Vanity Fair's gossipy archness and Premiere's earnest delving into behind-the-scenes minutiae, with a special emphasis on Tinseltown as fashion trendsetter.
It's being sold through bookstores, newsstands and some video stores. 

Though Ms. Volokh is a small woman, she has an outsized personality and dramatic flair that seem perfectly suited to capitalism as it is practiced in Hollywood.
Certainly life for her has changed considerably since the days in Kiev, when she lived with her parents, her husband and her two sons in a 2 1/2-room apartment in what she calls "silent internal immigration," dreaming of escape. 

Now, for example, she owns 48 hats.
However, she remembers the lean years and recalls with relish wearing her first major American purchase -- that turban10 years later and having a Los Angeles boutique owner ask her if it was a Chanel.
With obvious satisfaction, she says she told him: "No darling, I just give it a Chanel look." She keeps track of the rest of her hats by stapling Polaroid snapshots to the outside of each hatbox. 

Are the hats merely part of her new L.A. persona, along with the many ultra-thin Capri cigarettes she smokes, the parties she throws for 500 people, the Chekovian feasts she offers guests at her weekend place in Santa Barbara? 

"No, darling," she said recently in her fluent, slightly affected English, during a trip East to promote Movieline's national expansion. "You have to be born with it.
I used to wear hats in Russia, but I had to make them and my dresses.
On the hat side I wasn't getting what I wanted." 

Now 48 years old, Ms. Volokh has definite ideas about what she wants.
At Movieline, she wants "specific paragraphing, specific tone, a specific attitude -- bright and bold and tongue-in-cheek." In restaurants (in this case, the Russian Samovar, a New York restaurant operated by and for Soviet emigres), she didn't want the chirpy, folkish music bouncing through the room. "You people here think this is Russian music," she said with disdain, and called over to the waitress: "Could you turn it off?" 

That done, Ms. Volokh spoke with rampant eloquence about the many attributes she feels she was born with: an understanding of food, business, Russian culture, human nature, and parties. "Parties are rather a state of mind," she said, pausing only to taste and pass judgment on the Georgian shashlik ("a little well done, but very good"). "If you are born to give parties, you give parties.
Even in Russia we managed to give parties.
In Los Angeles, in our lean years, we gave parties." 

As publisher of a magazine devoted to movies as guideposts for fashion and other fantasies, Ms. Volokh sees her party-giving as an important part of business.
She has thrown extravagant soirees for crowds of people, but prefers more intimate gatherings. "At American cocktail parties everyone's always looking over your shoulder to see who they can talk to next.
I like rather tea, because it is at the end of the day." She serves high Russian tea, at 5 p.m. "It's supposed to be later but I just moved it.
In Los Angeles, it's important to catch people just after work." 

She also frequently invites directors, producers, actors, writers and other show business people for "coffee and clips in the pleasure dome." Guests bring movies on tape, and show their favorite three-to-five minute segments on the screen that unrolls from the ceiling of the Volokhs' art-nouveau library ("the pleasure dome").
They eat "sinful and sensual things" -- and explain their clips. "It's very revealing and soul baring," said Ms. Volokh. 

The idea for Movieline actually was dreamed up by an old friend of the Volokhs, Boris Krutchensky (who has the title of co-publisher), and Laurie Halpern Smith, now the magazine's co-editor.
Mr. Krutchensky approached Ms. Volokh five years ago about backing the publication, which started out as a listing guide.
She was interested only if she could guide it editorially as well. "Anne doesn't believe in blandness," said Ms. Smith. "She wants things to be exciting.
And she has this inexhaustible energy.
She'll think of an idea the editorial people think is impossible, then she'll have us make it work." 

In fact, Ms. Volokh wasn't just a rich lady who needed a hobby.
Back in the Soviet Union she was a respected journalist, writing a weekly column about the national cuisine for Sunday Izvestia.
Those columns -- vivid discussions of the cultural and literary reverberations of food as well as practical advice on how to glamorize dreary Sovietized meals -- became the basis for her erudite and entertaining cookbook, "The Art of Russian Cuisine," brought out in 1983 by Macmillan Publishing Co. 

"I don't trust people who don't eat," said Ms. Volokh, though she herself stopped eating lunch a few years ago to drop 25 pounds. "Look at Dostoevski and Kafka.
No one ever eats in their books and look at them. . . . Tolstoy's characters eat, Pushkin's, Gogol's." In her cookbook, which Macmillan is bringing out in soft cover this month (with the blini recipe revised so it works), she introduces each chapter with appropriate quotations from Russian literature: Pushkin on blini, Goncharov on piroghi.
In life, she offers practical dieting advice: "Divide your meals into important and unimportant.
In a great restaurant, don't deprive yourself.
The other meals don't matter." 

Amusing as she is, and frivolous as she can seem, this is a serious person with some difficult memories.
She was the child of relative privilege.
Her mother was a translator; her father was "the eternal vice director." 

"I emigrated to wear better hats, do better parties," she said with a giggle. "But we shouldn't leave out political reasons, number one.
You try to maintain your dignity under difficult circumstances.
One cannot imagine how you live when you live those double and triple lives." 

By 1973, after their second child was born, it had become clear to Ms. Volokh and her husband Vladimir, a computer scientist, that they wanted to leave the U.S.S.R. Ms. Volokh quit her job, to remove herself from the public eye.
The wait was miserable.
Before granting Ms. Volokh's parents a visa, the government required her mother to obtain permission from her first husband, whom she had divorced 38 years earlier. 

Mr. Volokh was fired from his job, and had to endure hours of organized verbal abuse from his co-workers, accusations of sabotage and counterrevolutionary activities.
The Volokhs were afraid that they'd end up like a friend of theirs who'd applied for a visa and waited for 10 years, having been demoted from his profession of theoretical mathematician to shipping clerk. 

They didn't.
Their visa came in relatively short order, and they moved to Los Angeles.
Mr. Volokh soon found work in his field, but Ms. Volokh refused the obvious and available occupation-as translatorfor a Russian who spoke fluent English. "That's always looking back," she said. "I wanted to be in business." On the way to that goal, she received her first U.S. paycheck for proofreading a book of Polish poetry, attended secretarial school, then went to work for a fund-raising organization.
Soon she was running the office. 

When her husband and son founded their computer company, Vesoft, she worked as business manager, bookkeeper and publicist.
Now Movieline is located in the same building as Vesoft. "Things work out unexpectedly in life," said Ms. Volokh. "You never know if you'll be chosen to be the scapegoat or the lucky one.
We were lucky." 

