.START 

Shareholders of Nuovo Banco Ambrosiano S.p.A. voted to accept a bid of 5,500 lire ($4.03) a share by France's Credit Agricole for 13.32% of the bank, rejecting an earlier, equal offer by Italy's Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A. 

The move will give Nuovo Banco a badly needed foreign presence, and make Credit Agricole the bank's largest shareholder.
It also opens a rift in the bank's shareholders' syndicate that could lead to a battle for control of the concern.
Nuovo Banco will become Italy's biggest private-sector bank when it completes its scheduled merger with Banca Cattolica del Venetoen by year end. 

Credit Agricole asked a Milan court to sequester the Nuovo Banco shares, the Italian news agency ANSA reported.
The tribunal is scheduled to rule on the request Friday.
No reason for the request was given.
Credit Agricole officials couldn't be immediately reached for comment. 

The decision to accept Credit Agricole's bid, valued at 283.3 billion lire ($207.4 million), came after a stormy weekend meeting.
Nuovo Banco's second largest shareholder, the Fiat S.p.A.-controlled investment concern, Gemina S.p.A., fought to have Generali's offer approved.
Gemina, which owns 13.26% of Nuovo Banco, abstained in the final vote on Credit Agricole, which was nonetheless approved by a majority of shareholders. 

The linkup with Credit Agricole will give Nuovo Banco its first foreign presence since it was formed from the wreck of the old Banco Ambrosiano, which collapsed amid scandal after the death of Chairman Roberto Calvi in 1982.
Since then, the bank has strengthened its Italian network, and has posted strong results. 

"The shareholders felt we needed a foreign presence more than we needed links with an insurance company," an Ambrosiano spokeswoman said. 

Gemina said in a statement that "it reserves the right to take any action to protect its rights as a member of the syndicate." A company spokeswoman said the company hadn't decided what measures to take, but didn't rule out legal action. 

Generali, Italy's biggest insurer, last month offered 5,500 lire a share for the Nuovo Banco stake held by Banco Popolare di Milano, the bank's largest shareholder, which announced plans to sell the holdings earlier this year. 

A Generali spokesman declined to comment on Nuovo Banco's rejection of the insurer's offer. 

On the Milan stock exchange, Nuovo Banco's shares jumped to 4,830 lire each from 4,695 lire Friday. 

