.START 

Manville, having rid itself of asbestos, now sells fiberglass, forest products, minerals and industrial goods.
Heady stuff it's not. 

But Manville's ownership is unusual, and it has caught the eye of some canny -- and patient -- investors.
The Denver-based concern, which emerged from bankruptcy-law proceedings late last year, is controlled by the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust.
The trust, which owns 80% of Manville's stock on a fully diluted basis, is a separate legal entity that is settling claims with asbestos victims. 

When and if the trust runs out of cash -- which seems increasingly likely -- it will need to convert its Manville stock to cash.
But as an 80% owner, if it tried to sell much of its stock in the market, it would likely depress the price of its shares. 

Some investors say there is a good chance that the trust will, instead, seek to convert the company's shares to cash, in some sort of friendly restructuring that wouldn't involve just dumping stock on the market. 

"Their principal asset is Manville common stock," says Jeffrey Halis, who runs Sabre Associates, an investment fund that owns Manville shares. "If they tried to sell, they'd be chasing their own tail.
What makes the most sense is to find someone who wants to buy the whole company or cause a recapitalization of all shares." 

The trust isn't commenting on when it might need to liquefy its Manville stock.
However, the trust's cash flow from investments is far short of its payments to asbestos victims.
Its cash and liquid securities fell by $338 million in the first six months of 1989. 

The trust also will receive $75 million a year starting in 1991 on a bond it holds from Manville.
And, beginning in 1992, it will have a claim on as much as 20% of Manville's annual net income.
Even so, the trust would seem to be facing a cash crunch.
As of June 30, it had settled only about 15,000 of the 81,000 received claims from asbestos victims, for an average of $40,424 each. (The average should drop over time, since the most expensive claims are being settled first).
And as of midyear, settled but unpaid claims amounted to $136 million -- more than half the trust's total of $268 million in cash and marketable securities. "At some point, we're going to need an infusion of funds," a person close to the trust says. 

Even before then, the trust may be eager to unload Manville stock.
It doesn't pay a dividend, and this trust needs income.
Moreover, with 88% of its assets tied up in Manville, the trust is badly in need of diversification. "Obviously, a diversified portfolio would have less risk," the person close to the trust says. 

Manville itself doesn't rule out a restructuring.
Though the ink is barely dry on its new, post-bankruptcy law structure, Bill Bullock, Manville's head of investor relations, says the company is continually pondering "whether there is a better way to be structured.
We understand that the trust is ultimately going to need to sell some of our shares," he says. 

Of course, one option would be for Manville to buy out the trust's shares -- which would do little to benefit public stockholders.
But the trust, in most cases, is forbidden from seeking a buyer for only its shares before November 1993.
And both the trust and Manville are seeking to avoid the bad publicity that, in the asbestos era, tarred the Manville name.
Thus, analysts say, the trust is unlikely to do anything that would hurt Manville's other shareholders. "This is a rare case of a company with a big majority holder which will probably act in the interests of the minority holders," one investor says. 

Even if there is no restructuring, Manville seems to be attractive long-term.
Its stock, at 9 5/8, trades at about 8 1/2 times estimated 1989 earnings -- an appropriately low multiple for a company with recession-sensitive customers.
Mr. Bullock says 45% of revenues are tied to construction.
Analysts predict little or no near-term growth. 

They are, nonetheless, high on Manville's management. "It's one of the best in the business," says Salomon Brothers analyst Stephen Dobi.
And he says Manville has the financial flexibility to buy other companies at the best possible momentwhen other construction-related firms are hurting and selling cheap.
With a conservative debt-to-equity ratio of 1-to-1 -- and $329 million in cash -- Manville is indeed actively on the prowl. 

So far, as a price-conscious shopper, Manville hasn't bought much.
Paul Kleinaitis, an analyst at Duff & Phelps, says, "Even though they have borrowing power, they have been disciplined about acquisitions." And Mr. Kleinaitis says that with 80% of its stock in friendly hands, Manville is the rare publicly traded company that can ignore short-term stock fluctuations and plan for the long haul. 

Manville 

(NYSE; Symbol: MVL) 

Business: Forest products and roofing 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $2.06 billions 

Net loss: $1.30 billion* 

Third quarter, Sept. 30, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 30 cents vs. 44 cents** 

Average daily trading volume: 

74,351 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 120 million 

*Includes $1.29 billion extraordinary charge. 

**Year ago figure is restated. 

