.START 

When last we left him, FBI Agent Nick Mancuso had solved a murder mystery, unraveled a Washington political scandal, and racked up some pretty good ratings numbers in the miniseries "Favorite Son." What next for the crusty FBI agent with the heart of gold?
A spinoff series, of course. 

There are plenty of worse inspirations for shows -- and most of them had already made the fall lineup: a nun raising some lovable orphans.
A den mother raising some lovable teen models.
A bunch of tans and bathing suits posing as lovable lifeguards. 

In that context, Robert Loggia's riveting performance as the unlovable -- even crotchety -- veteran agent seems a better franchise for a series than most.
Week by week on "Mancuso FBI" (NBC, Fridays, 10 p.m. ET), he pokes around the crime styles of the rich, famous and powerful of the Washington scene -- a loose cannon on deck at the FBI. 

Over the first few weeks, "Mancuso FBI" has sprung straight from the headlines, which is either a commendable stab at topicality, or a lack of imagination, or both.
The opening show featured a secretary of defense designate accused of womanizing (a la John Tower).
When his secretary is found floating dead in the pol's pool, Mancuso is called in to investigate. 

Last week, a young black girl claimed she had been raped by a white police officer (a la Tawana Brawley).
In this week's show, there's an unsafe nuclear weaponsmaking facility (a la Rocky Flats). 

Along the way, we're introduced to the supporting cast: a blond bombshell secretary (Randi Brazen -- her real name, honest), a scheming young boss (Fredric Lehne), another blonde bombshell who's also an idealistic lawyer (Lindsay Frost), and a forensics expert (Charles Siebert). 

If all of this seems a little stale, it's redeemed in part by some tricky plot twists: The usual suspects are found to be guilty, then not guilty, then guilty -- but of a different crime. (In last week's rape case, for example, the girl turns out to have been a victim of incest, and the biggest villains are the politicians who exploit the case.) Most of all though, the show is redeemed by the character of Mancuso. 

What makes the veteran FBI man so endearing is his hard-bitten cynicism -- earned, we discover, when he was assigned to the civil rights movement back in the 1960s.
He wasn't protecting the Freedom Marchers; he was tailing them as subversives.
This is not the "Mississippi Burning" scenario that thrills his young colleagues: "Kid, you've been reading Classic Comics too long," Mancuso says. "Back in 1964, the FBI had five black agents.
Three were chauffeurs for J. Edgar Hoover, and two cleaned his house." 

At the core of Mr. Loggia's Mancuso is his world-weary truculence.
He describes a reporter as "Miss First Amendment." He describes a drowned corpse as "Esther Williams." And when he's told "Try a little tenderness," he shoots back "I'm going home to try a little linguine." 

Yet for all his cynicism, he's at heart a closet idealist, a softy with a secret crush on truth, justice and the American Way.
He's the kind of guy who rescues trampled flags. 

If "Mancuso FBI" has an intriguing central character, it also has a major flaw: It's wildly overwritten.
Executive Producers Steve Sohmer and Jeff Bleckner (and writer/producers Ken Solarz and Steve Bello) have revved this show up to the breaking point. 

To start, there's always a crisis -- and someone always worries, "What if the press gets a hold of this?" At least once an episode we see protestors marching around screaming slogans.
At least once Mancuso's boss yells "In here -- now," and proceeds to dress his investigator down: "You are a dinosaur . . . a hangover in a $10 suit . . . One more word and you are out on a park bench, mister." Finally, of course, the boss gives in, but he's still yelling: "I find myself explaining anything to Teddy Kennedy, you'll be chasing stolen cars in Anchorage." 

In fact, throughout "Mancuso FBI," we don't get words or lines -- we get speeches.
Witnesses shout, scream, pontificate: ". . . a dream that the planet could be saved from itself and from the sadistic dumb creatures who try to tear down every decent man who raises his voice." 

And Mancuso himself is investigating at the top of his lungs: "How the hell can you live with yourself?" he erupts at a politician. "You twist people's trust.
You built your career on prejudice and hate.
The scars will be here years after the polls close." 

In each show, Mancuso gets to unleash similar harangues: "Where the hell are they gonna live when people like you turn the world into a big toxic waste dump?
You're the real criminal here . . . and what you did wasn't just a murder -- it was a crime against humanity." 

And, at least once a show, someone delivers the line "Get off that soapbox." Now that's advice the writers should take to heart.
They have a series with a good character, some interesting, even occasionally surprising plot lines, and they're ruining it. 

Why, when a key witness disappears, does Mancuso trash her apartment, tearing down drapes, smashing walls?
It's a bizarre and totally inappropriate reaction, all to add more pizzazz to a script that's already overdosing on pizzazz.
That's not plot.
That's not character.
That's hyperventilating. 

There is a scene at the end of the first week's show where Mancuso attends the unveiling of the memorial to his dead partner David.
Asked to say a few words, he pulls out his crumpled piece of paper and tries to talk, but he's too choked up to get the words out.
He bangs on the piece of paper in frustration, then turns and walks away.
It was a profoundly moving moment for series television, and Robert Loggia's acting resonated in the silence. 

There's a pretty good program inside all the noise of "Mancuso FBI." If the show's creators could just let themselves be quiet for a little, they might just hear it. 

