.START 

Chip's Memory Is Here 

Today, Here Tomorrow 

TWO COMPANIES plan to market a new chip with ceramic circuits that store data even when the power is off. 

Today's most widely used data-storing chips have "volatile" memories -- their data disappear if they aren't fed a steady diet of electricity, so they need external power supplies. 

National Semiconductor Corp. and a start-up named Ramtron Corp. plan to start shipping so-called ferroelectric memories, which can remember data for at least 10 years without any current flowing to them.
The chips use materials, such as lead zirconate titanate, to form microscopic switches that retain their data without electricity. 

Developers caution that broad applications are several years away because the technology isn't fully refined.
But Ramtron of Colorado Springs, Colo., plans to start shipping commercial quantities of simple ferroelectric chips in December.
The company expects the chips eventually to be used in devices that mimic a whole range of computer memory equipment, including floppy-disk and hard-disk drives. 

National Semiconductor is getting ferroelectric technology from Krysalis Corp. in Albuquerque, N.M. National says it agreed to acquire Krysalis's assets and will start shipping commercial quantities of its first chips, including a 4-kilobit memory, next year. 

Once production hurdles are overcome, the chips could take over a significant part of the market.
In addition to not needing an outside power source, they are potentially cheaper to make because they require fewer manufacturing steps than conventional chips. 

Military buyers have shown interest, National says, because ferroelectric chips resist atomic radiation.
And while today's non-volatile chips -- such as electronically erasable programmable read-only memory chips -- can't be used in a computer's central memory because they "learn" data slowly, ferroelectric chips accept data at very high speeds. 

Showing Up in Court 

Without Being There 

AN AUSTIN, Texas, company plans to make it easy for you show up in court a thousand miles away without leaving town. 

Witnesses often must travel long distances to give face-to-face depositions before lawyers and court reporters.
That means huge travel bills.
And telephone or videotape depositions just don't match physical encounters. 

That could change, thanks to lower long-distance rates and cheaper electronics.
Video Telecom Corp., which markets videoconferencing systems, is working with court reporters to wire a nationwide network to allow depositions by live television. 

The company installed a prototype system that connects Dallas with Miami over digital phone lines.
And it is preparing to set up shop in Chicago, New York and 10 other cities where court-reporting agencies can tie conference rooms into the network. 

While lawyers arranged individual tie-ups before, the formal network of court reporters should make things easier and cheaper. 

An attorney will be able to use the network for an hourly fee of between $200 and $400, depending on the quality of the picture, to take depositions from witnesses in any of the connected cities. 

Japanese Reverse Tack 

On Patent Protection 

JAPAN'S MISUSE of U.S. patents has been a sore point for American chip makers.
Now at least one Japanese company is turning the courtroom tables. 

Until now, most Japanese charges have been responses to suits against them.
But last year Hitachi Ltd. surprised Japan's electronics industry when it accused Korea's Samsung Electronics Co. of using Hitachi technology to make dynamic random-access memory chips. (A settlement was reached but wasn't made public.) And Hitachi went on the offensive against the U.S.'s Motorola Inc. earlier this month with a suit charging that Motorola's new MC88200 chip infringes on a Hitachi patent. 

Another recent Hitachi suit accuses Motorola of reverse engineering a Hitachi technology -- a turnabout from a nation of champion reverse engineers. 

The moves illustrate the more aggressive attitude toward patent protection that patent experts say Japan is starting to take. 

Hitachi made the reverse-engineering charges in an amendment to a counterclaim filed in a federal district court in Texas after Motorola sued Hitachi for patent violation.
Hitachi charges Motorola "has engaged in fraudulent and inequitable conduct in the procurement of certain Motorola patents" used in Motorola's MC68030 microprocessor chip. 

Translation: Motorola appears to have taken a Hitachi technology that is patented in the U.S., Hitachi says, and "tried to make it look like a new technology." 

Motorola either denied or wouldn't comment on the various charges. 

Odds and Ends 

COMPUTER chips that simulate human vision have been developed by Japan's Sharp Corp.
They mimic the brain by "looking" at an image, extracting the fundamentals -- boundaries, corners and lines -- and translating them into computer data.
Sharp says the set of chips could improve fax machines, graphics computers or identification systems that recognize facial features. . . . An N.V. Philips unit has created a computer system that processes video images 3,000 times faster than conventional systems.
Using reduced instruction-set computing, or RISC, chips made by Intergraph of Huntsville, Ala., the system splits the image it "sees" into 20 digital representations, each processed by one chip. 

