.START 

They want late-night shuttles to the biology labs.
They want a 24-hour library.
And like college radicals everywhere, they are talking about a demonstration -- where protesters would gather quietly near the science building and raise their hands, classroom style. 

Such is the fiber of the wool that woolly intellectuals let fly at gatherings of Harvard University's new Society of Nerds and Geeks, or SONG. SONGsters are mad as heck about campus anti-intellectualism and they aren't going to take it anymore, at least not without trying a few really neat ideas first. 

"We could have called ourselves the Academic Intellectual Society, but then everyone would have said, `Oh, you mean the nerd-and-geek club, '" Leonid Fridman, SONG's graduate-student adviser, told 19 attendees at the club's inaugural meeting earlier this month.
Membership has since swelled to between 20 and 25. 

Some people may think of nerds as calculator-toting, socially awkward individuals with shirt-pocket liners for their pencils and a preoccupation with computers and matters numerical.
Geeks, by at least one definition, are chicken-mutilating circus freaks. 

But SONG founder Jeremy Kahn, a Harvard junior, thinks of nerds and geeks more as "nonconformists," albeit with a studious bent.
One of the group's first projects is a "procrastination hot line" that students could call when they have an urge to delay studying. 

The club plans to show nerdy movies, such as "Real Genius," in which physics whizzes pop corn with lasers; and naturally, the "Revenge of the Nerds," a tale of college males with runny noses and ill-fitting pants.
One of its "more ambitious goals" is to get Jaime Escalante, the Los Angeles high-school mathematics teacher featured in the film "Stand and Deliver," to come to Harvard for a guest lecture. 

Nerds and geeks sometimes find themselves a bit isolated at Harvard.
So Mr. Kahn says high priority is being given to creating a computerized matchmaking service "where instead of being matched for eye color, you could be matched for similar intellectual interests." For instance? "I'm a math major, but I want to know about psychobiology.
Hopefully, I'd find someone in psychobiology who wanted to know more about mathematics." 

It could work.
Meanwhile, finding a volunteer to write the computer program isn't a problem. 

