.START 

On the hungry streets of Naguib Mahfouz's Cairo, life is nasty, brutish and wickedly entertaining. 

Zaita the "cripple-maker" rearranges the limbs of aspiring beggars -- and takes a cut of every cent they cadge.
Hassan Kamel Ali is a card shark and dope dealer who has a simple creed: "I live in this world, assuming that there is no morality, God or police." For the killer and thief, Said Mahran, fame flows from the barrel of a gun. "One man said you act as a stimulant," a prostitute tells him, "a diversion to relieve people's boredom." 

Mr. Mahfouz's Cairo also has Sufi sheiks and saintly wives who look to God, not crime, for their salvation.
But it is his portrait of Cairo low-life -- of charlatans and opium addicts, of streets filled with "dust, vegetable litter, and animal dung" -- that made his reputation, and won him the Nobel Prize in 1988. 

Three novels, "The Beginning and the End" (412 pages, $19.95), "The Thief and the Dogs" (158 pages, $16.95), and "Wedding Song" (174 pages, $16.95), recently published by Doubleday offer an uneven sample of the 77-year-old Mr. Mahfouz's talent.
But they do show the range of a restless intellect whose 30-odd novels span five decades and include work of social realism, protest and allegory.
They also chart the evolution of a city that has grown tenfold in the author's lifetime, from a colonial outpost of fez-wearing pashas to a Third World slum choking on its own refuse. "Soon it'll be so crowded," a narrator complains, "that people will start eating each other." 

"The Beginning and the End," easily the best of the three, belongs to Mr. Mahfouz's "realistic" period and it is the one for which he is most renowned.
Published in 1949, it follows the decline of a Cairo family with the saga-like sweep and rich detail that critics often compare to Dickens, Balzac and Galsworthy. 

A minor bureaucrat dies suddenly, dooming his family to poverty and eventual disgrace.
His daughter turns to dressmaking, then to peddling herself for a few piasters.
One son sacrifices his own career so that his avaricious brother can succeed, while another helps support the family with money siphoned from crime. 

The real tragedy, though, lies not in the family's circumstances but in its concern for appearances.
Mourning for the father is overshadowed by the shame of burying him in a pauper's grave.
The family moves to another house at night to conceal shabby belongings from neighbors.
And the successful son wishes his embarrassing siblings dead. 

As a critique of middle-class mores, the story is heavy-handed.
But its unsentimental sketches of Cairo life are vintage Mahfouz.
We see, smell and hear slums filled with "the echoes of hawkers advertising their wares interspersed with abusive language, rattling coughs and the sound of people gathering spittle in their throats and spewing into the street." And we meet engaging crooks, such as Hassan "the Head," famed for his head-butting fights, his whoring and his hashish. "`God has not yet ordained that I should have earnings, ' he tells his worried mother." Hassan comes to a bad end, but so does almost everyone else in the book. 

If the setting is exotic, the prose is closer to Balzac's "Pere Goriot" than it is to "Arabian Nights." Mr. Mahfouz began writing when there was no novelistic tradition in Arabic, and he modeled his work on Western classics.
In one sense, this limits him; unlike a writer such as Gabriel Garcia Marquez, who has a distinctive Latin voice, Mr. Mahfouz's style offers little that can be labeled "Egyptian." But the familiarity of his style also makes his work accessible, as the streets of Cairo come alive for the Western reader as vividly as Dickens's London or Dostoevski's St. Petersburg. 

"The Thief and the Dogs," written in 1961, is a taut, psychological drama, reminiscent of "Crime and Punishment." Its antihero, Said Mahran, is an Egyptian Raskolnikov who seeks nobility in robbing and killing. "I am the hope and the dream, the redemption of cowards," he says in one of many interior monologues.
Later, he recalls the words of his Marxist mentor: "The people! Theft! The holy fire!" 

Said's story reflects the souring of socialism under Nasser, whose dictatorial rule replaced the monarchy overthrown in 1952.
By 1961, Mr. Mahfouz's idealism had vanished or become twisted, as it has in Said.
His giddy dream of redeeming a life of "badly aimed bullets" by punishing the "real robbers" -- the rich "dogs" who prey on the poor -- leads only to the death of innocents, and eventually to his own. 

Cairo's spirited squalor also has gone gray.
Here, the city is dark and laden with symbolism: Said has left his jail cell only to enter the larger prison of Cairo society.
While the theme is compelling, the plot and characters are not.
We never care about Said or the "hypocrites" he hunts. "The Thief and the Dogs" is a pioneering work, the first stream-of-consciousness novel in Arabic, but it is likely to disappoint Western readers. 

The 1981 novel "Wedding Song" also is experimental, and another badly aimed bullet.
The story of a playwright's stage debut unfolds in first-person monologues, in the manner of Faulkner's "The Sound and the Fury." But the device obscures more than it illuminates.
Buried in the work is a meditation on the morality of art, and on the struggle for integrity in an unfair world.
But again, the themes get tangled in Mr. Mahfouz's elliptical storytelling.
The indirectness of his later work reflects both an appetite for new genres and the hazards of art in the Arab world.
Mr. Mahfouz has been pilloried and censored for questioning Islam and advocating peace with Israel.
Veiling his message has helped him endure.
Art, says the playwright in "Wedding Song," is "the surrogate for the action that an idealist like me is unable to take." 

"Wedding Song" gives glimpses of a Cairo that has become so much harsher since his youth, when, as he once said, "the poorest person was able to find his daily bread and without great difficulty." The clutter of the 1940s remains, but its color has drained away, and the will to overcome has been defeated.
Cars can't move because of overflowing sewers.
Characters complain ceaselessly about food queues, prices and corruption.
And the ubiquitous opium addict is now a cynical and selfish man who gripes: "Only government ministers can afford it these days!" Having lost their faith in God, in social reform and in opium, Cairenes are left with nothing but their sense of humor. 

Mr. Horwitz is a Journal staff reporter covering the Middle East. 

