.START 

The stock market correction of Oct. 13, 1989, was a grim reminder of the Oct. 19, 1987 market collapse.
Since, like earthquakes, stock market disturbances will always be with us, it is prudent to take all possible precautions against another such market collapse. 

In general, markets function well and adjust smoothly to changing economic and financial circumstances.
But there are times when they seize up, and panicky sellers cannot find buyers.
That's just what happened in the October 1987 crash.
As the market tumbled, disorderly market conditions prevailed: The margins between buying bids and selling bids widened; trading in many stocks was suspended; orders took unduly long to be executed; and many specialists stopped trading altogether. 

These failures in turn contributed to the fall in the market averages: Uncertainty extracted an extra risk premium and margin-calls triggered additional selling pressures. 

The situation was like that of a skier who is thrown slightly off balance by an unexpected bump on the slope.
His skis spread farther and farther apart -- just as buy-sell spreads widen during a financial panic -- and soon he is out of control.
Unable to stop his accelerating descent, he crashes. 

After the 1987 crash, and as a result of the recommendations of many studies, "circuit breakers" were devised to allow market participants to regroup and restore orderly market conditions.
It's doubtful, though, whether circuit breakers do any real good.
In the additional time they provide even more order imbalances might pile up, as would-be sellers finally get their broker on the phone. 

Instead, an appropriate institution should be charged with the job of preventing chaos in the market: the Federal Reserve.
The availability of timely assistance -- of a backstop -- can help markets retain their resilience.
The Fed already buys and sells foreign exchange to prevent disorderly conditions in foreign-exchange markets.
The Fed has assumed a similar responsibility in the market for government securities.
The stock market is the only major market without a market-maker of unchallenged liquidity or a buyer of last resort. 

This does not mean that the Federal Reserve does not already play an important indirect role in the stock market.
In 1987, it pumped billions into the markets through open market operations and the discount window.
It lent money to banks and encouraged them to make funds available to brokerage houses.
They, in turn, lent money to their customers -- who were supposed to recognize the opportunity to make a profit in the turmoil and buy shares. 

The Fed also has the power to set margin requirements.
But wouldn't it be more efficient and effective to supply such support to the stock market directly?
Instead of flooding the entire economy with liquidity, and thereby increasing the danger of inflation, the Fed could support the stock market directly by buying market averages in the futures market, thus stabilizing the market as a whole. 

The stock market is certainly not too big for the Fed to handle.
The foreign-exchange and government securities markets are vastly larger.
Daily trading volume in the New York foreign exchange market is $130 billion.
The daily volume for Treasury Securities is about $110 billion. 

The combined value of daily equity trading on the New York Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ over-the-counter market ranges between $7 billion and $10 billion.
The $13 billion the Fed injected into the money markets after the 1987 crash is more than enough to buy all the stocks traded on a typical day.
More carefully targeted intervention might actually reduce the need for government action.
And taking more direct action has the advantage of avoiding sharp increases in the money supply, such as happened in October 1987. 

The Fed's stock market role ought not to be very ambitious.
It should seek only to maintain the functioning of markets -- not to prop up the Dow Jones or New York Stock Exchange averages at a particular level.
The Fed should guard against systemic risk, but not against the risks inherent in individual stocks.
It would be inappropriate for the government or the central bank to buy or sell IBM or General Motors shares.
Instead, the Fed could buy the broad market composites in the futures market.
The increased demand would normalize trading and stabilize prices.
Stabilizing the derivative markets would tend to stabilize the primary market.
The Fed would eliminate the cause of the potential panic rather than attempting to treat the symptom -- the liquidity of the banks. 

Disorderly market conditions could be observed quite frequently in foreign exchange markets in the 1960s and 1970s.
But since the member countries of the International Monetary Fund agreed to the "Guidelines to Floating" in 1974, such difficulties have been avoided.
I cannot recall any disorder in currency markets since the 1974 guidelines were adopted.
Thus, the mere existence of a market-stabilizing agency helps to avoid panic in emergencies. 

The old saying advises: "If it ain't broke, don't fix it." But this could be a case where we all might go broke if it isn't fixed. 

Mr. Heller, now at VISA International, was a governor of the Federal Reserve Board from 1986 until earlier this year.
This is adapted from a speech to the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. 

