.START 

European Community employers fear that the EC Commission's plans for a "charter of fundamental social rights" is a danger to industrial competitiveness. 

"We don't want Brussels deciding conditions for workers unless they are necessary and useful," said Zygmunt Tyszkiewicz, secretary general of the employers' confederation Unice. 

Unice -- an acronym for the Union of Industrial and Employers' Confederations of Europe -- fears that the charter will force EC countries to adopt a single pattern in labor relations.
Workers and management, Mr. Tyszkiewicz said, would lose the "flexibility and diversity" that has so far allowed them to adapt to local conditions and traditions. 

The British government also strongly opposes the charter in its current form.
It argues, as does Unice, that labor relations are best left to be regulated at the national level. 

France will propose a slightly watered-down version of the charter to be discussed by EC social-affairs ministers on Monday, officials said.
But the cosmetic changes aren't expected to win over Britain. "We still have serious differences with the text," a British official said, because it provides for a "regulation of the labor market." 

Mr. Tyszkiewicz said the charter would put poorer EC countries such as Spain, Greece and Portugal at a disadvantage.
It would force these countries to introduce minimum standards for pay and working hours, and provide for collective bargaining and worker "participation" in major corporate decisions. 

This, he warned, would prevent these countries from bridging the difference with their richer EC brethren.
Indeed, lower wages -- in Greece, they are a third of the EC average -- aren't enough to offset higher transport costs and lower productivity in the southern countries.
Increasing labor costs, Mr. Tyszkiewicz argued, would only put the countries at a further disadvantage in competing in the barrier-free EC market planned for after 1992. 

But the Unice official said that producing a charter acceptable to both Britain and European industry isn't an unattainable goal.
The charter would just have to be restricted to a list of workers' fundamental rights, without seeking to impose any norms. 

A key provision in the current version of the charter would give the commission a mandate to produce an "action program" detailing on what points EC member states would be required to comply with the goals set out in the charter.
This provision lies at the heart of the British and Unice fears of "social engineering" by the commission. 

One possible political solution, an EC official said, would be for the commission to present the action program in late November, before the adoption of the charter at a summit of EC governments on Dec. 8 and 9.
This would leave Britain free to adopt the charter after having rebutted the action program. 

The charter was approved by the EC Commission on Sept. 21.
France's Socialist government, which currently holds the council's rotating presidency, is committed to having the charter adopted by all 12 EC states before the end of 1989 -- the bicentennial of the French revolution and its "Universal Declaration of Human Rights." 

