.START 

As program trading comes under renewed attack for causing stock market gyrations, a few people on Wall Street say it is time to consider extreme measures. 

The real answer to curbing wild swings in stock prices, they say, might be to curb or even abolish stock-index futures. 

A stock-index future is a contract to buy or sell the market value of a basket of stocks, such as the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.
Since stock futures were created in 1982, trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and other exchanges has boomed to the point where trading in stock-index futures rivals that in the stocks themselves. 

The conventional view, as voiced by Goldman, Sachs & Co. partner Fischer Black, is that stocks and "derivatives" such as futures and options "form a single market, and that derivatives make it a more liquid market." 

But increasingly, people are questioning that view, and the critics include some of the country's most successful investors.
Warren Buffett has been on record as opposing stock-index futures since their inception in 1982.
And Mario Gabelli, another star in the investing world, says, "My gut says the negatives of futures and synthetics far outweigh the benefits." 

Like others, Mr. Gabelli says that if futures cause investors to lose confidence in stocks, they will move away from stocks -- as many have already done.
And those who remain, he says "will demand a higher return and over time raise the cost of capital to companies." 

Essentially, the critics of stock-index futures fall into two camps.
One group says the futures contribute to stock market volatility; the other contends that futures are a sideshow of speculation that detracts from the stock market's basic function of raising capital. "Before futures," says New York investor Michael Harkins, "you actually had to pay attention to whether the thing you were buying had any intrinsic value." 

While it was once expected that futures would mimic stock prices, traders now routinely check the futures markets in Chicago before they buy or sell stocks.
When Chicago futures prices jump up or down, the New York Stock Exchange follows. 

On Tuesday, for instance, the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 80 points in little more than an hour.
Then, in the space of a 20-minute coffee break, the average rallied almost all of the way back.
Paul Lesutis, who manages more than $3 billion of investments at Provident Capital Management Inc., blames futures markets for leading the way. "The fundamentals don't change in an hour," he says. "I think they should close down the futures exchange and then we could get back to investing." 

Index arbitrage -- the rapid-fire buying and selling of stocks offset with opposite trades in futures -- is frequently blamed for adding to stock market volatility.
Although index arbitrage is said to add liquidity to markets, John Bachmann, managing partner of Edward D. Jones, says too much liquidity isn't a good thing 

"The kind of instant liquidity that is implied by index futures is that you can buy a portfolio over two years and get out in one day.
It's too disruptive," he says. "It isn't investing." 

But stock-index futures have plenty of support.
Defenders say futures make markets more efficient and provide ways for investors to reduce risks.
They note that stocks experienced volatile swings long before futures.
And, defenders say, few people complain about futures when stock prices are rising. 

Louis Margolis, managing director in charge of equity options and futures at Salomon Inc., says that trading baskets of stocks began in the 1970s, a decade before the advent of futures.
Futures, he says, merely cut down on trading costs. 

He says "blaming futures is like blaming the messenger." Since stock-index arbitrage merely narrows the gap between prices in the futures and stock markets, it can't add to volatility, he says. 

Futures "don't need defending," says Andrew Yemma, a spokesman for the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, which trades the S&P 500, by far the largest stock-index futures contract. 

Despite the current outcry over stock market volatility, few people expect stock futures to disappear.
For one thing, the Chicago futures exchanges have political and financial clout -- including many friends in Congress.
And traders say that futures have become an accepted part of the financial landscape. "All life is about change -- either you adapt or die," says one Chicago futures trader. "If futures aren't permitted here, we'll take it to Australia or Tokyo." 

Average daily volume in S&P 500 futures last year was 44,877 contracts.
Based on yesterday's closing price of the S&P, the average value of one day's trading amounts to $7.6 billion.
By contrast, average dollar volume on the Big Board last year was $5.3 billion. 

Many investment managers say futures are useful as a way to hedge portfolios.
If managers fear that the overall stock market will fall, but want to continue owning stocks, they can hold on to specific stocks and sell a corresponding amount of futures contracts. 

Average daily volume in S&P 500 futures last year was 44,877 contracts.
Based on yesterday's closing price of the S&P, the average value of one day's trading amounts to $7.6 billion.
By contrast, average dollar volume on the Big Board last year was $5.3 billion. 

Many investment managers say futures are useful as a way to hedge portfolios.
If managers fear that the overall stock market will fall, but want to continue owning stocks, they can hold on to specific stocks and sell a corresponding amount of futures contracts. 

And although criticism of futures generally comes from Wall Street, one Chicago futures trader notes that brokerage firms rely on futures as hedging tools when they buy and sell big blocks of stocks from institutions. 

One reason futures are said to add volatility is that -- unlike in stocks -- people can speculate in futures with little money down.
Margin requirements for speculators on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange are currently about 7%. "For $10 million, you can move $100 million of stocks," a specialist on the Big Board gripes. "That gives futures traders a lot more power." By contrast, an investor in stocks must put up 50% in cash. 

Some critics say futures encourage people to think of stocks as a single commodity, rather than as investments in individual businesses.
Thus, they say, futures inhibit the basic purpose of the stock market: to accurately price securities so that capital and investment flows where it's needed most. 

The S&P 500 index futures "transferred the identity of 500 stocks into one unit-making them a simple commodity to trade," says George Kegler, senior vice president at A. Webster Dougherty in Philadelphia. "It took away the need to know the bad third-quarter report of IBM, for example," Mr. Kegler says. 

Of course, portfolio trading -- the increasingly common practice of buying or selling baskets of actual stocks -- also treats stocks as homogenous commodities. "There is a class of investor that wants to be exposed" to the whole market, says Sandip Bhagat, assistant vice president at Travelers Investment Management Co.
The S&P futures are merely a "cheaper and quicker" way to get access to all 500 stocks, he says.
The Big Board yesterday began trading in its own basket trading vehicle representing the S&P 500 stocks. 

But owning index futures isn't the same as owning the underlying stocks.
Stockholders, as a group, can win, because they own a share of corporate earnings, which can grow and boost stock prices. 

Futures, on the other hand, are a zero sum game -- a market for making side bets about the direction of stock prices. "You don't own anything," says Stephen Boesel, a money manager for T. Rowe Price in Baltimore. "You're making a pure bet on the market." 

