.START 

Why do you continually ignore the salubrious effects of indexing the basis of capital gains for inflation?
Why do you maintain the House-passed capital-gains plan is a "temporary" reduction when it is not? 

I think the reason is that you are confusing tax "rates" with tax "payments." Your Sept. 29 page-one story on the House-passed capital-gains plan is a good example.
You lead readers to believe that the House reduced the capital-gains tax for two years only.
You virtually ignore the tax-reducing power of indexation, which in many cases is more substantial than a lower rate. 

The monetary tax benefit of indexation for all gains in excess of inflation can be measured using the following equation: tax rate, times inflation rate, times basis for the gain.
Depending on the size of the gain and the rate of inflation, indexation can mean a lower tax payment than using the 19.6% rate without indexation.
But in any event -- and this is the important point -- tax "payments" on capital gains will be lower with indexation than under current law, even though the tax "rate" is the same under both systems. 

As you can see, the capital-gains reduction plan adopted by the House would not be temporary, but permanent.
I hope that you begin talking about the plan's permanent and, in my view, most beneficial feature -- indexation. 

Rep. Robert K. Dornan (R., Calif.) 

Washington 

That the motivation for the two-year reduction to 19.6% is budgetary does not mean it is not in the public interest.
The reduction eases the burden on portfolio changes and frees capital to seek more productive or more appropriate uses.
But what is really significant is the indexation of capital gains after 1991.
To argue that this is "not likely" to affect the economy in positive ways is contrary both to recent experience with capital-gains tax cuts and to common sense.
A large part of the long-term appreciation of assets reflects inflation, and the taxation of inflation-created capital gains is confiscation.
Does the Journal really believe that people ignore the prospect of having a substantial part of their capital confiscated when they decide whether to save or how to invest? 

Under current law, it is not financially rational to forgo consumption.
Real, aftertax returns from financial assets are on the order of 1% or 2% a year.
The capital-gains tax reform is a step toward correcting one of the gravest structural weaknesses of the U.S. economy, the closely connected phenomena of low savings rates, weak capital formation and high capital costs. 

J. Sigurd Nielsen 

Richmond, Va. 

