.START 

Unocal Corp. 's decision to put its Norwegian oil and gas interests up for sale earlier this week is another step in the company's strategic review of its properties, and shows that few of them are sacred cows. 

The company declined to estimate the value of the Norwegian holding.
But Eugene L. Nowak, an analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., forecast that the sale will bring in "$200 million or substantially more." 

The proposed transaction is the latest in a redeployment of assets by the Los Angeles-based oil company that has included the $200 million sale of its headquarters property and the pending sale of half of its Chicago refinery and related marketing operations to Petroleos de Venezuela S.A. 

Mr. Nowak said he attaches particular importance to the proposed sale because it suggests that the company is willing to sell oil and gas assets that aren't part of its major strategic strengths. 

Unocal said it expects to complete the sale of its Unocal Norge A/S unit by next March or April.
In addition to an 18% stake in the Veslefrikk offshore field, the Norwegian unit has interests ranging from 10% to 25% in three other Norwegian oil and gas production licenses. 

In 1986, Unocal sold a 7.5% stake in the Veslefrikk field to Deutsche Erdolversorgungs G.m.b.H., a West German oil company, for an undisclosed amount.
In 1987, it sold a 2.5% stake in the Veslefrikk field to the Swedish national oil company, resulting in a $7 million after-tax gain. 

However, those sales were early in the field's history, before production equipment was installed.
The field is currently being developed and is slated to start production by the end of the year.
It's expected to produce about 62,000 barrels per day. 

A company spokesman said the Veslefrikk field's gross reserves were estimated in 1987 at 229 million barrels.
However, he added that that estimate, made before extensive development drilling, currently is being reappraised. 

The spokesman said Unocal has had "considerable interest" from prospective buyers.
The company has retained J. Henry Schroder Wagg & Co. as financial adviser and agent for the sale. 

