.START 

The surprise resignation yesterday of British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson sent sterling into a tailspin against the dollar by creating uncertainties about the direction of the British economy. 

The U.S. unit also firmed against other currencies on the back of sterling's tumble, as market participants switched out of pounds. 

The pound also dropped precipitously against the mark, falling below the key 2.90-mark level to 2.8956 marks from 2.9622 marks late Wednesday. 

Mr. Lawson's resignation shocked many analysts, despite the recent recurring speculation of a rift between the chancellor and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. 

Indeed, only hours earlier, Mrs. Thatcher had called Mr. Lawson's economic policies "sound" and said she has "always supported" him. 

"There was a general feeling that we'd seen the worst," said Patrick Foley, deputy chief economic adviser for Lloyds Bank in London. "The resignation came as a great surprise." 

Graham Beale, manager of foreign-exchange operations at Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking Corp. in New York, added that Mrs. Thatcher's comments reinforced the market's growing confidence about sterling and compounded the unit's later decline. 

"The market was caught totally the wrong way. . . . Everyone was extremely long on sterling," Mr. Beale said. 

In late New York trading yesterday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8400 marks, up from 1.8353 marks late Wednesday, and at 142.10 yen, up from 141.52 yen late Wednesday.
Sterling was quoted at $1.5765, sharply down from $1.6145 late Wednesday. 

In Tokyo Friday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 142.02 yen, up from Thursday's Tokyo close of 141.90 yen. 

Few analysts had much good to say about the pound's near-term prospects, despite the fact that most don't anticipate a shift in Mrs. Thatcher's economic policies. 

Mr. Foley of Lloyds noted that Mr. Lawson's replacement, John Major, the British foreign minister, will take time to establish his credibility and, in the meantime, sterling could trend downward in volatile trade. 

But Mr. Foley predicted few economic policy changes ahead, commenting that Mr. Major shares "a very similar view of the world" with Mr. Lawson. 

Bob Chandross, chief economist at Lloyds Bank in New York, also noted that the pound's sharp decline is pegged more to uncertainty in the market than a vision of altered United Kingdom economic policies. 

Unless Mr. Lawson's resignation leads to a change in British interest-rate policy -- Mrs. Thatcher's administration firmly supports high interest rates to keep inflation in check -- or posturing toward full inclusion in the European Monetary System's exchange-rate mechanism, Mr. Lawson's withdrawal will have little long-term impact on exchange rates, Mr. Chandross concluded. 

Also announcing his resignation Thursday was Alan Walters, Mrs. Thatcher's economic adviser and Mr. Lawson's nemesis. 

The pound, which had been trading at about $1.6143 in New York prior to Mr. Lawson's announcement, sank more than two cents to $1.5930, prompting the Federal Reserve Bank to buy pounds for dollars.
The Fed's move, however, only proved a stopgap to the pound's slide and the Fed intervened for a second time at around $1.5825, according to New York traders. 

Meanwhile, dollar trading was relatively uninspired throughout the session, according to dealers, who noted that Thursday's release of the preliminary report on the U.S. third-quarter gross national product was something of a nonevent. 

U.S. GNP rose at an annual rate of 2.5% in the third quarter.
The implicit price deflator, a measure of inflation, was down to a 2.9% annual rate of increase in the quarter from a 4.6% rate of gain in the second quarter. 

In Europe, the dollar ended lower in dull trading.
The market closed prior to Mr. Lawson's announcement. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery rose $3.40 to $372.50 an ounce in heavy trading.
The close was the highest since August 3.
Estimated volume was five million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Friday, gold was quoted at $370.85 an ounce. 

