.START 

The Senate Agriculture Committee is responding to trading abuses in the futures markets with a far-reaching bill that would become the Futures Trading Practices Act of 1989.
The proposed legislation has a laudable goal: to assure the integrity of the U.S. futures markets.
However, as is common with sweeping legislation, the proposal contains many provisions that could destroy important parts of the system it sets out to preserve. 

The complex bill, introduced by Sens. Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.), Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), and Bob Kerrey (D., Neb.), covers a wide range of provisions that would affect the funding and authority of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and would profoundly change the way the industry is regulated.
These include provisions relating to the technology and systems that must be employed by exchanges, oversight and disciplinary procedures for exchange trading practices, the relationship between commodity brokerage firms and floor traders, and exchange governance.
The bill also elevates even minor rule infractions to felonies and provides for recovery of punitive damages in civil lawsuits and arbitration cases without any showing of willful misconduct. 

Many aspects of the bill are salutary, providing appropriate public safeguards that can and should be instituted throughout the industry.
Indeed, some of the bill's requirements, including broad representation on the exchanges' boards of directors and strong measures to prevent conflicts of interest, already have been put in place by the Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange and other futures exchanges. 

Other aspects of the bill, however, are either structured in ways that create unnecessary burdens for the industry or actually are harmful to the exchanges, the industry and ultimately the general public. 

One of the most prominent features is the requirement that in three years all exchanges have in place a system that records all trades by a source independent of the executing broker.
The New York futures exchanges have been working together to develop a trade recording system much like the one called for in the bill.
We would be delighted to have such a system in place today.
But is it realistic for Congress to mandate by a rigid deadline a system that has not yet been subjected to feasibility studies?
What if the system doesn't work?
What if the only system that does work is so expensive that, at best, only the largest exchanges can afford it? 

Cost is a key consideration because of the global sweep of the financial markets.
The U.S. futures exchanges compete world-wide as never before.
Today, trading in almost any commodity can be diverted from U.S. markets with just a few strokes of a keyboard.
All foreign markets are aggressively courting U.S. business.
In fact, several London markets already offer lower costs for trading in the same or very similar contracts.
The U.S. exchanges need both market integrity and cost-efficiency; long-term growth depends on it. 

The Senate bill contains many provisions that will increase the costs of trading.
The most arbitrary of these is the imposition of "service fees," which will directly widen the cost spread between U.S. and foreign markets. 

Other provisions have a more subtle, but nonetheless real and detrimental effect on the international position of U.S. exchanges.
These include the extension of liability into areas beyond those established by judicial precedent and the expansion of liability to include punitive damages. 

In addition to increasing costs as a result of greater financial exposure for members, these measures could have other, far-reaching repercussions. 

One section of the bill would make all commodity brokerage firms and floor brokers liable for damages without willful misconduct.
Nowhere in the federal securities law is simple negligence or inadvertent action a source of liability under similar circumstances. 

It is only logical to assume that the enactment of this provision will lead to increased litigation.
In an already low-profitmargin business, commodity brokerage firms may well decide to eliminate the risk and expense of dealing with the retail public, depriving the private individual of access to the markets. 

Another measure makes commodity brokerage firms liable for violations committed by independent floor brokers who execute trades for them.
This untried concept would expose these firms to potentially astronomical punitive damages. 

Faced with the virtually impossible task of supervising the execution of each trade, many commodity brokerage firms are likely to stop doing business with independents and instead hire their own salaried floor brokers.
This would force out of business many of the individuals and small firms that function as floor brokers.
A consequence of their departure could be a serious diminution of market liquidity. 

Finally, under the bill, a number of legitimate, longstanding business practices would be arbitrarily banned, unless the CFTC were to take specific and timely action to permit them to continue.
In other words, regulation will occur through inaction and happenstance, rather than through a normal deliberative procedure. 

The affected practices include the placing of oral orders, which is the way most public customer orders are placed, and trading between affiliated brokers, even though in some cases trading with affiliates may be the only way to obtain the best execution for a client.
Also precluded would be dual trading, whereby a broker trades for customers as well as his own account, a practice that provides needed liquidity to the markets. 

All U.S. futures exchanges agree that these and other trading practices require proper regulation and supervision.
Nonetheless, each has too much potential value to the system to be banned by legislative fiat before the CFTC carefully considers all the consequences of a ban and what the regulatory alternatives are. 

The markets are complex, as is the environment in which they function.
When problems surface, the temptation becomes strong to summarily overhaul a market system that has served for more than 100 years.
That temptation must be put aside to permit careful consideration of all the implications, positive and negative, of the proposed resolutions to those problems, and to avoid creating a marketplace where no one trades. 

Mr. Nastro is chairman of the Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange in New York and director of commodity administration at Shearson Lehman Hutton. 

