.START 

Toni Johnson pulls a tape measure across the front of what was once a stately Victorian home. 

A deep trench now runs along its north wall, exposed when the house lurched two feet off its foundation during last week's earthquake.
A side porch was ripped away.
The chimney is a pile of bricks on the front lawn.
The remainder of the house leans precariously against a sturdy oak tree. 

The petite, 29-year-old Ms. Johnson, dressed in jeans and a sweatshirt as she slogs through the steady afternoon rain, is a claims adjuster with Aetna Life & Casualty.
She has been on the move almost incessantly since last Thursday, when an army of adjusters, employed by major insurers, invaded the San Francisco area to help policyholders sift through the rubble and restore some order to their lives. 

Equipped with cellular telephones, laptop computers, calculators and a pack of blank checks, they parcel out money so their clients can find temporary living quarters, buy food, replace lost clothing, repair broken water heaters, and replaster walls.
Some of the funds will used to demolish unstable buildings and clear sites for future construction. 

Many adjusters are authorized to write checks for amounts up to $100,000 on the spot.
They don't flinch at writing them. "That's my job -- get {policyholders} what they're entitled to," says Bill Schaeffer, a claims supervisor who flew in from Aetna's Bridgeport, Conn., office. 

The Victorian house that Ms. Johnson is inspecting has been deemed unsafe by town officials.
But she asks a workman toting the bricks from the lawn to give her a boost through an open first-floor window.
Once inside, she spends nearly four hours measuring and diagramming each room in the 80-year-old house, gathering enough information to estimate what it would cost to rebuild it.
She snaps photos of the buckled floors and the plaster that has fallen away from the walls. 

While she works inside, a tenant returns with several friends to collect furniture and clothing.
One of the friends sweeps broken dishes and shattered glass from a countertop and starts to pack what can be salvaged from the kitchen.
Others grab books, records, photo albums, sofas and chairs, working frantically in the fear that an aftershock will jolt the house again. 

The owners, William and Margie Hammack, are luckier than many others.
A few years ago, Mrs. Hammack insisted on buying earthquake insurance for this house, which had been converted into apartments.
Only about 20% of California home and business owners carried earthquake coverage.
The Hammacks' own home, also in Los Gatos, suffered comparatively minor damage. 

Ms. Johnson, who works out of Aetna's office in Walnut Creek, an East Bay suburb, is awed by the earthquake's destructive force. "It really brings you down to a human level," she says. "It's hard to accept all the suffering people are going through, but you have to.
If you don't, you can't do your job." 

For Aetna and other insurers, the San Francisco earthquake hit when resources in the field already were stretched.
Most companies still are trying to sort through the wreckage caused by Hurricane Hugo in the Carolinas last month.
Aetna, which has nearly 3,000 adjusters, had deployed about 750 of them in Charlotte, Columbia, and Charleston.
Adjusters who had been working on the East Coast say the insurer will still be processing claims from that storm through December.
It could take six to nine months to handle the earthquake-related claims. 

When the earthquake rocked northern California last week, Aetna senior claims executives from the San Francisco area were at the company's Hartford, Conn., headquarters for additional training on how to handle major catastrophes, including earthquakes. 

Since commercial airline flights were disrupted, the company chartered three planes to fly these executives back to the West Coast and bring along portable computers, cellular phones and some claims adjusters.
Because of the difficulty of assessing the damages caused by the earthquake, Aetna pulled together a team of its most experienced claims adjusters from around the country.
Even so, few had ever dealt with an earthquake. 

Some adjusters, like Alan Singer of San Diego, had been working in Charleston for nearly four weeks.
He returned home last Thursday, packed a bag with fresh clothes and reported for duty Friday in Walnut Creek.
Offices were set up in San Francisco and San Jose. 

In a few instances, Aetna knew it would probably be shelling out big bucks, even before a client called or faxed in a claim.
For example, officials at Walnut Creek office learned that the Amfac Hotel near the San Francisco airport, which is insured by Aetna, was badly damaged when they saw it on network television news. 

"The secret to being a good adjuster is counting," says Gerardo Rodriguez, an Aetna adjuster from Santa Ana. "You have to count everything." 

Adjusters must count the number of bathrooms, balconies, fireplaces, chimneys, microwaves and dishwashers.
But they must also assign a price to each of these items as well as to floors, wallcoverings, roofing and siding, to come up with a total value for a house.
To do that, they must think in terms of sheetrock by the square foot, carpeting by the square yard, wallpaper by the roll, molding by the linear foot.
Using a calculator and a unit-price guide for such jobs as painting, plumbing and roofing in each major region of the country, adjusters can figure out the value of a home in today's market and what it would cost to rebuild it. 

Sometimes repairs are out of the question.
When Aetna adjuster Bill Schaeffer visited a retired couple in Oakland last Thursday, he found them living in a mobile home parked in front of their yard. 

The house itself, located about 50 yards from the collapsed section of double-decker highway Interstate 880, was pushed about four feet off its foundation and then collapsed into its basement. 

The next day, Mr. Schaeffer presented the couple with a check for $151,000 to help them build a new home in the same neighborhood.
He also is working with a real-estate agent to help find them an apartment to rent while their home is being built. 

Many of the adjusters employed by Aetna and other insurers have some experience with construction work or carpentry.
But such skills were alien to Toni Johnson.
Four years ago, she was managing a film-processing shop and was totally bored.
A friend mentioned that she might want to look into a position at Aetna, if she was interested in a job that would constantly challenge her.
She signed up, starting as an "inside" adjuster, who settles minor claims and does a lot of work by phone.
A year later, she moved to the commercial property claims division. 

She spent a month at an Aetna school in Gettysburg, Pa., learning all about the construction trade, including masonry, plumbing and electrical wiring.
That was followed by three months at the Aetna Institute in Hartford, where she was immersed in learning how to read and interpret policies. 

Her new line of work has some perils.
Recently, a contractor saved her from falling three stories as she investigated what remained of an old Victorian house torched by an arsonist. "I owe that contractor.
I really do," she says. 

As Ms. Johnson stands outside the Hammack house after winding up her chores there, the house begins to creak and sway.
The ground shakes underneath her.
It is an aftershock, one of about 2,000 since the earthquake, and it makes her uneasy. 

The next day, as she prepares a $10,000 check for the Hammacks, which will cover the cost of demolishing the house and clearing away the debris, she jumps at the slightest noise.
On further reflection, she admits that venturing inside the Hammacks' house the previous day wasn't "such a great idea." 

During her second meeting with the Hammacks, Ms. Johnson reviews exactly what their policy covers.
They would like to retrieve some appliances on the second floor, but wonder if it's safe to venture inside.
Ms. Johnson tells them that, if the appliances can't be salvaged, their policy covers the replacement cost.
Mr. Hammack is eager to know what Aetna will pay for the house, which has to come down. "When will I get that check for a million dollars?" he jokes. 

The adjuster hadn't completed all the calculations, but says: "We're talking policy limits." In this case, that's about $250,000.
It suddenly dawns on Mr. Hammack that rebuilding the house in Los Gatos, an affluent community in Santa Clara County, may cost more than Aetna's policy will pay. "We can lose money on this," he says. 

"And you didn't want me to buy earthquake insurance," says Mrs. Hammack, reaching across the table and gently tapping his hand. 

Earthquake insurance costs about $2 to $4 annually for every $1,000 of value, and high deductibles mean it generally pays only when there is a catastrophe.
So, many Californians believe they can get by without it.
Even Ms. Johnson herself made that assumption. "I always knew that the 'Big One' was coming, but not during my lifetime," she says.
Now she says she's thinking of contacting her own insurance agent. 

For Ms. Johnson, dealing with the earthquake has been more than just a work experience.
She lives in Oakland, a community hit hard by the earthquake.
She didn't have hot water for five days.
The apartment she shares with a 12-year-old daughter and her sister was rattled, books and crystal hit the floor, but nothing was severely damaged.
Her sister, Cynthia, wishes Toni had a different job. "We worry about her out there," Cynthia says. 

Last Sunday, Ms. Johnson finally got a chance to water her plants, but stopped abruptly. "I realized I couldn't waste this water when there are people in Watsonville who don't have fresh water to drink." She hasn't played any music since the earthquake hit, out of respect for those who died on Interstate 880 where the roadway collapsed. 

