.START 

Southam Inc. said its unprofitable weekly newspaper, The Financial Times of Canada, is up for sale. 

Analysts said the announcement, the latest in a series of divestitures and restructuring moves, is aimed at improving Southam's earnings before the expiration in June of a standstill pact with Torstar Corp. 

When that agreement expires, Torstar will be free to increase its 22.4% stake in Southam, or to make an offer for the whole company.
Descendants of the Southam family hold an additional 22.6% stake in the Toronto-based company, Canada's largest newspaper publisher. 

The newspaper could fetch between 15 million and 20 million Canadian dollars (US$12.8 million to $17.1 million), said one analyst, who asked not to be identified.
A spokesman for Southam declined to comment on the price the company is seeking or on estimates of the paper's annual losses, which most analysts place at between C$4 million and C$7 million. 

Yesterday, Southam reported third-quarter earnings of C$10.8 million on revenue of C$395.4 million, down from C$14.6 million on revenue of C$389.6 million in the year-ago quarter. 

"To be profitable, the paper requires more circulation and building circulation is an expensive undertaking," said John Macfarlane, the paper's publisher.
Southam said the level of future investment required by the paper would have restricted its options in other areas. 

The acquisition of the Financial Times of Canada is "well within reach for any number of media companies, both public and private," said James Cole, an analyst with Toronto-based BBN James Capel Inc. 

Possible bidders include Christopher Ondaatje, a Toronto financier and vice chairman of Hees International Bancorp Inc., a holding company controlled by Toronto's Bronfman family.
Mr. Ondaatje sold his stake in Pagurian Corp. to Hees earlier this year and is said to be seeking a media acquisition.
Mr. Ondaatje couldn't be reached for comment, but Roy Mac-Laren, chairman of CB Media, a closely held concern that publishes two business magazines, said his company would take a close look at the newspaper. 

Mr. Cole said the sale of the 77-year Financial Times, which Southam has owned since 1961, is consistent with Southam's strategy of cutting costs to obtain maximum profits from its operations while disposing of "chronically under-performing" assets. 

Southam agreed to sell its 47% stake in Selkirk Communications Ltd., a broadcasting concern, to Maclean Hunter Ltd. for about C$285 million last year.
This year, it has moved to cut costs in its newspaper division through layoffs and asset sales, while reaching joint venture and acquisition agreements in other areas. 

The Financial Times of Canada has no links to the British daily newspaper, The Financial Times. 

