.START 

In 1987, the Presidents Commission of the NCAA, which oversees most U.S. intercollegiate sports, contracted with the Washington-based American Institutes for Research to do a survey on the college experiences of what the body chooses to call student-athletes.
A brief "executive summary" was issued last April, and attracted some, but not much, attention.
More-detailed reports followed, and attracted even less notice.
I suspect I may be one of the few people to have read them all. 

The sixth and last report now is out, and it puts the effort in perspective.
Titled "Comments From Students," it focuses on the real shame of college sports: what happens to young athletes once they enter academe.
It's little less than a cry for help from those who make the costly show possible. 

The previous five reports were mainly statistical, but clear enough in outline.
They showed that participants in Division I football and men's basketball, the big-time "revenue sports," entered school with poorer high-school grades and test scores than "minor-sport" jocks and students who participated in other extracurricular activities, and they got lower grades once they got there, at least partly because of the athletic demands placed on them. 

The football and basketball players spent more time on their sports in season than they did on class attendance and homework combined (30 hours a week versus 25.3).
Almost half (49.8%) reported suffering "mental abuse" from coaches, and almost one-quarter (24.8%) said they had been pressured to ignore injuries. 

But even those numbers don't describe the situation as well as the athletes do in their own words.
The composite portrait that emerges isn't of a pampered jock marking time until he can land a seven-figure pro contract -- he's part of a tiny minority.
Rather, it's of a kid (we're talking about 17 to 22 year olds here) having a tough time making the best of what will probably be his one shot at college. 

The pertinent question, coming at the end of a lengthy, confidential questionnaire, was this: "Are there things about your college life you would like to tell us that we didn't ask about?" Of the almost 3,000 athletes surveyed, 1,240 took the time to respond.
Here are a few of their answers: 

-- "They say that I am a student-athlete, but really I'm an athlete-student.
They lied to me on the recruiting trip.
Football is the No. 1 thing here." -- Junior football player. 

-- "Being a student-athlete at college is a lot different from high school.
First, the sport you play is no longer a game -- it becomes a job.
Your coaches demand a lot more out of you even though some of them are not willing to take the time to watch you progress.
You become expendable.
Your interest is not taken to heart because people only care about your performance." -- Freshman basketball player. 

-- "The coaches should have a more personal and sympathetic attitude toward the athletes -- not treat us like pieces of meat.
They always say to get a degree first, but they don't allow us time or to skip practice to study for a test.
They just want to get their job done at any cost to the athlete." -- Freshman football player. 

-- "The pressure put on us to win at all times has resulted in physical violence, such as punching and slapping by coaches.
Some days the coaches make you feel as though you are part of a large herd of animals.
In other words, they treat you like a piece of meat." -- Sophomore football player. 

-- "Playing intercollegiate sports doesn't give you a lot of time to spend with others.
We are almost left out of {campus} social activities.
This mostly happens because we go from football in the fall to lifting in the winter to football again in the spring." -- Freshman football player. 

-- "You talk about free time -- .what free time?
Time to relax and enjoy ourselves is always taken up by something to do with football (meetings, lifting weights, conditioning or films).
There is no recovery period -- it's go, go, go.
ABUSE to our bodies is overwhelming.
With our schedule, it's hard to sleep well knowing what is going to happen the next day." -- Junior football player. 

-- "Physical exhaustion and depression are common in my life and in some of my teammates' lives." -- Football player, class unspecified. 

-- "More often than not, college athletes go through college never really experiencing collegiate life to the fullest.
One has to establish one's own identity away from athletics and make athletics only a part, not a whole, of the student-athlete's life." -- Sophomore basketball player. 

-- "Somehow, and I don't know how, the game needs to be played for fun again, and not for the big bowl revenues or lucrative TV contracts." -- Graduate-student football player. 

There have been rumblings that, at long last, changes may be in the works.
The Knight Foundation, of Akron, Ohio, has established a national commission to look into college-sports reform, and the NCAA Presidents Commission earlier this month recommended cutting spring football practice in half, moving the start of basketball practice back by a month and reducing maximum schedules in that sport to 25 games from 28. 

The key word in that paragraph, though, is "may." NCAA Executive Director Richard Schultz, in accepting a place on the Knight Commission, urged that the panel take a "balanced" view, which looks for all the world like a plea not to rock the boat too much, and the presidents' recommendations could face considerable opposition at the NCAA's full convention in January, which will vote on them.
I read that one unnamed athletics director predicted that the basketball-cutback proposal could fail because of "real world" (i.e., economic) considerations. 

But the "real world" also includes the unpleasant truth that colleges are cheating the athletes they have wooed and won.
If they won't change their ways voluntarily, maybe somebody bigger -- Congress -- should make them. 

