.START 

We read with interest Robert Tomsho's Sept. 28 page-one article on Robert Redford ("The Sundance Kid Gets Little Respect Around Sundance").
Misunderstanding conversations with us, Mr. Tomsho argued that Mr. Redford's environmental views are at odds with Utah residents.
This may have been true 10 years ago, but times have changed, even in Utah.
Mr. Redford no longer stands out as an extremist.
He has not changed, but those around him have.
Many of his views on the protection of wilderness areas, rivers and canyons are now embraced by mainstream, conservative Utahans. 

Recently, some 60 environmental and outdoor groups representing such divergent points of view as the Sierra Club, the League of Women Voters and the National Rifle Association joined together to request a reassessment of the environmentally unsound Central Utah Project.
While Utah is not yet a haven for environmentalism, public views toward the environment have significantly improved.
In one of the most conservative, Republican states in the entire nation, the greening of Robert Redford's neighbors is the real story that Mr. Tomsho missed. 

Sammye Meadows 

Sam Rushforth 

Gary Bryner 

Heber City, Utah 

If Mr. Redford wanted to be accepted by the people of Utah, he should have taken an advisory role instead of one of forcing his personal preferences.
Furthermore, his actions imply that it is too damaging or costly for society to provide jobs through power-plant construction, coal mining or to build roads for public safety because of the adverse impact on the environment, but it is just fine and dandy for him to transform a mountain high in the Wasatch Range into a ski resort. 

It astounds me he can rationalize his self-righteous and greedy actions in Utah.
An excellent environmental actor he is. 

David Vranian 

M.B.A. Student 

University of Colorado 

Boulder, Colo. 

Mr. Redford, like it or not, is like a braking system on a runaway truck, kind of slowing it down into control.
He's rich, famous and intelligent, and has the time to do something that not even the federal government will do.
Mr. Redford is slowing down a mindless, speeding maniac known as the progress of mankind. 

Personally, I'm glad there are people like him around to slow down the profit takers, and those who are in such a blind hurry for something that may appear to benefit them in the immediate future, not caring about the long-range implications. 

Ron Dyer 

Atlanta 

