.START 

When the going gets tough, it's tough to trade stocks in continental Europe. 

That's the troubling conclusion reached by many international investors and money managers angry at the malfunctions on Continental stock exchanges during last week's global market turbulence.
They say the recent market volatility has underscored the shortcomings of the way many European exchanges trade stocks. 

The weaknesses of Continental exchanges are driving some fund managers to switch business to stocks traded on London's stock exchange, which quotes firm trading prices for about 350 blue-chip issues from 12 major countries. 

"I'm not saying London covered itself in glory, but the events of the past week have certainly exposed Europe's weaknesses," says Stewart Gilchrist, a director of Scottish Amicable Investment Managers in Glasgow, Scotland, which manages about #6 billion ($9.63 billion) in institutional money.
He says the problems on European exchanges included market-system breakdowns, delayed execution of buy and sell orders and trading suspensions. "The events strengthen London's hand in becoming the center for trading European stocks," Mr. Gilchrist says. 

Unable to unload a large block of a French blue-chip company's shares in Paris for two days last week, a frustrated Scottish Amicable fund manager finally tossed down her phone in disgust and called James Capel & Co., a London brokerage firm.
The firm did the trade in seconds on the London stock exchange's SEAQ automated-quotation system. 

On so-called Manic Monday, Oct. 16, stock prices plunged across Europe and trading problems erupted.
London had some problems, too.
The London exchange's electronic price-reporting system provided only indicative, or non-firm, prices for about 40 minutes on Manic Monday.
Some dealers say other traders weren't picking up their phones. 

But London's problems were nothing compared with the Continent's.
In Brussels, which recently spent millions of dollars on a computer-assisted trading system, disgusted traders watched helplessly as a software failure before opening on Manic Monday prevented trading for two days.
For 48 hours, no one had any idea precisely how much his securities were worth. 

By Wednesday, frustrated Belgian brokers reopened the market by using the time-honored method of quoting stocks with chalk on a blackboard.
The Belgian computer system finally was repaired and restarted on Tuesday of this week, with the aid of Toronto Stock Exchange officials who developed the system. 

In Frankfurt, which only has a two-hour daily stock-trading session even in the best of times, stocks didn't open for the first 45 minutes because of order imbalances that brokers blame on a wave of sell orders from small investors. 

As banks processed six-foot telexes of sell orders, the crush led to Manic Monday's worst decline: German stocks ended down 13%.
Exchange officials extended trading hours, 75 minutes on Monday and 65 minutes on Tuesday, to clear up order backlogs. 

In France, more than half the top 25 blue-chip stocks -- including such giants as BSN and Elf Aquitaine -- didn't open until Wall Street rallied late in the European trading day, traders say.
The rally transformed some big sell orders into big buy orders, solving an order-imbalance problem.
But by that time, many big institutions had switched business to London. 

"Belgium was closed for two days, France closed for a couple of hours, Germany was stuck.
It was a nightmare," says Susan Noble, an investment manager at Robert Fleming Holdings Ltd. 's International Investment Management unit in London. "It's very worrying that these markets can't cope." 

On Manic Monday, the volume of German shares traded in London more than tripled to 2.2 million, and the volume of French shares rose 48%. (By comparison, German domestic stock volume in Frankfurt only doubled that day.) 

The switch to the London market during such turbulent times is significant.
For one thing, the size of the affected market is enormous -- the European stock markets account for some 22.5% of global stock market capitalization, with an estimated value of $2.175 trillion, according to Morgan Stanley Capital International.
The Continental markets alone contribute about 14.3% of estimated world market capitalization of $9.671 trillion. 

Though the widely traded shares that are quoted in London account for only a small portion of those totals, they still are the most closely watched stocks and are often viewed as a barometer for the local markets generally. 

The switch to London underscores the fact that despite the economic restructuring associated with European Community efforts to develop a single market by 1992, European stock trading remains a highly fragmented and very localized activity.
Against this backdrop, one thing that doesn't seem likely to result from 1992 is a single European stock market. 

Rather, there increasingly is a group of international brokerage and trading firms that operate in most European financial centers -- including European giants such as Barclays Bank PLC and Deutsche Bank, as well as Merrill Lynch & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. of the U.S. and Japan's Nomura Securities Co. 

These firms, which often have acquired a local brokerage firm, are calling the shots when it comes to deciding in which market to transact a trade.
And senior officials of two U.S. securities houses say they switched trades in European stocks to the London market last week when they couldn't unwind positions on the Continent. 

Meantime, brokers on the Continent are worried, too, mostly by the potential loss of business. "I would be much happier if this volume {in German stocks} were in Frankfurt rather than London," says Dieter Bauernfeind, head of international equity sales at Dresdner Bank in Frankfurt.
He acknowledges that spreads "were too wide and volumes too light" in the extreme conditions on Manic Monday. 

Already the Germans appear to be acting; at a special meeting on the day of the decline, directors of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange voted to extend their trading hours, although they haven't decided when or by how much.
A Frankfurt exchange official, acknowledging the brokers' anxieties, says the market still feels it "functioned OK during this crash." The Dutch, who had some trading problems because of insufficient computer capacity, say new equipment to solve the problems ought to be installed within a month. 

Says a spokeswoman for the Brussels Bourse: "Nobody around here will tell you they are happy the system didn't work.
But it's just one of those things that happened.
Investors can be assured now that this kind of problem can never occur again." 

But for others, the pledges echo the promises made after the 1987 stock crash, when similar problems led many markets to develop the new systems that performed so badly last week. 

"They all said they invested huge amounts of money.
But they either didn't buy the right machines or they wasted it," says Fleming's Ms. Noble. 

