.START 

Ekco Group Inc., Nashua, N.H., expects to report that net income in the third quarter, ended Oct. 1, fell 50% to 60% from $2.1 million, or 11 cents a share, a year earlier. 

Robert Stein, president and chief executive officer, attributed the expected decline partly to the effects of a two-week strike last month at the company's Masillon, Ohio, bakeware facility.
Softer-than-expected orders in early September also played a role, he said in an interview. 

But Mr. Stein said he is "reasonably confident" that earnings for the full year will exceed the $3.1 million, or 17 cents a share, in 1988.
That would require fourth-quarter net of more than about 22 cents to 24 cents a share, assuming that Mr. Stein's third-quarter estimate proves accurate.
In the year-earlier fourth quarter, the company had profit of $2.7 million, or 15 cents a share. 

Third-quarter revenue is expected to be $40 million to $45 million, up from $38.2 million a year earlier, according to Neil Gordon, treasurer.
The year-earlier periods don't reflect results of the company's Woodstream Corp. unit, acquired last January, but include some Canadian operations that were sold at the end of 1988. 

August through October traditionally is the busiest season for the bakeware business, as many retailers use the goods as autumn promotional items.
Mr. Stein said some retailers -- perhaps anxious about minimizing inventories -- appear to have held back on orders in September but have been ordering more heavily in October. 

Mr. Stein said Woodstream is "marginally profitable" but hasn't performed as well as expected.
Woodstream's Victor-brand mousetraps and other pest-control products are "doing very well," and its plastic storage-case products "are poised for growth," he said.
But the unit's third segment, wildlife traps, is suffering from a "depressed market," and Ekco is seeking to sell that segment, he said.
Mr. Stein said he expects profit to be higher in 1990 than in 1989, reflecting a number of measures taken since the acquisition of Ekco Housewares in late 1987. (Prior to acquiring the housewares business, the company was known as Centronics Corp.; Centronics had been a maker of computer printers, but Mr. Stein and other officers decided to sell that business after Japanese competitors grabbed a dominant share of the market.) 

Mr. Stein said tighter operating controls have enabled Ekco to reduce inventory levels 25% to 30%; improve on-time delivery of orders to about 95% from around 70%; and to lower the number of labor hours required to produce a unit.
By moving the design of new products in-house -- instead of contracting out the work -- the company also has been able to come up with designs that can be manufactured more efficiently, he said. 

In addition to those measures, the company spent heavily earlier this year to install displays at its customers' retail outlets -- a strategy that Mr. Stein said has helped bolster awareness of the company's brands. 

Ekco's housewares operation makes kitchen tools and gadgets, as well as bakeware, at factories in the U.S. and Canada.
The main issue in the strike at the Ohio facility was health-care benefits, Mr. Stein said.
The strike ended Oct. 

Ekco continues to seek further acquisitions in the consumer-products industry, Mr. Stein said.
He indicated that Ekco may be interested in acquiring another company with revenue in the range of $75 million to $100 million, partly because mass merchandisers increasingly want to rely on larger, and fewer, suppliers. 

