.START 

Troubled Saatchi & Saatchi Co. has attracted offers for some of its advertising units, with potential suitors including Interpublic Group, but has rejected them, people familiar with the company said. 

Industry executives said Interpublic approached Saatchi in August about buying its Campbell-Mithun-Esty unit, but was turned down by Chairman Maurice Saatchi.
More recently, Interpublic inquired about one of Saatchi's smaller communications companies -- identified as the Rowland public relations firm by several industry executives -- but again was rebuffed, they said.
Interpublic's chairman and chief executive officer, Philip Geier Jr., made the pitches in visits to Mr. Saatchi in London, the executives said. 

A Saatchi spokesman declined to comment about Interpublic.
But the spokesman confirmed that Saatchi has received several inquiries from companies interested in acquiring its Campbell-Mithun and Rowland units.
He added, "We have no intention of selling either business." 

Interpublic declined comment. 

The offers come as Saatchi is struggling through the most troubled period in its 19-year history.
Takeover speculation has been rife, its consulting business is on the block, and its largest shareholder, Southeastern Asset Management, has said it's been approached by third parties regarding a possible restructuring.
Analysts have continually lowered their earnings estimates for the company, and their outlook, at least for the short term, is bleak. 

In the midst of the current turmoil, Saatchi is attempting to shore up its ad businesses.
It named a new chief executive officer, former IMS International head Robert Louis-Dreyfus.
It rebuffed an offer by Carl Spielvogel, head of Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates unit, to lead a management buy-out of all or part of Saatchi.
And last week, people close to Saatchi said Maurice Saatchi and his brother, Charles, would lead a buy-out if a hostile bid emerged. 

But Saatchi's troubles have only whipped up interest among outsiders interested in picking off pieces of its ad businesses.
While Saatchi's major agency networks -- Backer Spielvogel and Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising -- would be difficult for any ad firm to buy because of potential client conflicts, its smaller businesses are quite attractive. 

Campbell-Mithun-Esty, for example, has had big problems at its New York office, but offers strong offices in other areas of the country, including Minneapolis and Chicago.
That would would make it appealing to a network such as Interpublic that already has a healthy New York presence. (While there would be some client conflicts, they wouldn't be nearly as onerous as with Saatchi's other agencies.) Campbell-Mithun also would be a sizable addition to an agency network: It has billings of about $850 million and blue-chip clients including General Mills, Jeep/Eagle and Dow Brands. 

Rowland, meanwhile, has expanded aggressively, and now ranks as the fifth-largest U.S. public relations firm, according to O'Dwyer's Directory of Public Relations Firms.
It would be attractive to an agency such as Interpublic, one of the few big agency groups without an affiliated public relations firm of its own.
Other Saatchi units include ad agency McCaffrey & McCall, which has the Mercedes account and which has been attempting to buy itself back; and Howard Marlboro, a sports and event marketing firm. 

Despite Saatchi's firm stand against selling its ad units, U.S. analysts believe the company may ultimately sell some of the smaller units.
Mr. Louis-Dreyfus, in a recent interview, said he might sell "a marginal agency or office." Analysts believe he may ultimately dispose of some of the non-advertising businesses. 

Prudential's Final Four 

Prudential Insurance Co. of America said it selected four agencies to pitch its $60 million to $70 million account. 

In addition to Backer Spielvogel Bates, a Saatchi unit that has handled the account since 1970, the other agencies include Lowe Marschalk, a unit of the Lowe Group; Grey Advertising; and WPP Group's Scali, McCabe, Sloves agency.
All agencies are New York-based. 

A spokesman for the insurance and financial services firm, based in Newark, N.J., said it hopes to make a decision within three to four months. 

Jamaica Fires Back 

The Jamaica Tourist Board, in the wake of Young & Rubicam's indictment on charges that it bribed Jamaican officials to win the account in 1981, released a scathing memo blaming the agency for the embarrassing incident. 

The memo attempts to remove the tourist board as far as possible from the agency, which pleaded innocent to the charges.
Among other things, the memo contends that Young & Rubicam gave false assurances that the investigation wouldn't uncover any information that would "embarrass the government of Jamaica or the Jamaica Tourist Board." It also contends that Young & Rubicam never told the tourist board about its relationship with Ad Ventures, a Jamaican firm hired by the agency.
The U.S. indictment charges Ad Ventures was a front used to funnel kickbacks to the then-minister of tourism. 

The memo also chastises the agency for the timing of its announcement Thursday that it would no longer handle the $5 million to $6 million account.
The agency declined comment, but said it will continue work until a new agency is chosen. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNT: American Suzuki Motor Corp., Brea, Calif., awarded its estimated $10 million to $30 million account to Asher/Gould, Los Angeles.
Also participating in the finals was Los Angeles agency Hakuhodo Advertising America.
American Suzuki's previous agency, Keye/Donna/Pearlstein, didn't participate. 

AYER TALKS: N W Ayer's president and chief executive officer, Jerry J. Siano, said the agency is holding "conversations" about acquiring Zwiren Collins Karo & Trusk, a midsized Chicago agency, but a deal isn't yet close to being completed. 

WHO'S NEWS: John Wells, 47, former president and chief executive of N W Ayer's Chicago office, was named management director and director of account services at WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson agency in Chicago. . . . Shelly Lazarus, 42, was named president and chief operating officer of Ogilvy & Mather Direct, the direct mail division of WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather agency. 

