.START 

For bankers and regulators, Arizona is looking more like Texas every day. 

On Friday, Los Angeles-based First Interstate Bancorp said it expects a net loss of $16 million for the third quarter of 1989 because of hemorrhaging at its First Interstate Bank of Arizona unit.
First Interstate said the unit, bludgeoned by Arizona's worsening real-estate woes, will have a $174 million loss for the quarter.
First Interstate took a huge $350 million provision for loan losses at the Arizona bank.
It charged off an estimated $200 million of Arizona loans, leaving the unit with a reserve for future losses of $255 million, about 61% of its $416 million of troubled loans and repossessed real estate. 

First Interstate made the move under pressure from regulators.
The action capped a spurt of grim Arizona banking news for the third quarter, and emphatically signaled that Arizona is challenging Texas's long reign as banking's busiest graveyard.
Earlier last week, Valley National Corp., the state's largest locally owned banking company, reported a $72.2 million loss and suspended its dividend. 

Pinnacle West Capital Corp., which has been wrangling with regulators for months over what to do about Pinnacle's moribund Merabank thrift unit, suspended its dividend and reported a 91% plunge in third-quarter net income.
Security Pacific Corp. said third-quarter credit losses surged a third to $109 million, mainly because of sour Arizona real-estate loans.
New York-based Chase Manhattan Corp. took an $85 million Arizona-related charge. 

Furthermore, the regulatory maneuvering behind First Interstate's loss suggests regulators have concluded that lenders' reserves are far too low to absorb their future Arizona losses and are forcing bankers to do something about it.
Examiners from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency had been combing through First Interstate's real-estate portfolio since last month; they first recommended that First Interstate take a provision that was less than the eventual $350 million third-quarter hit.
When First Interstate balked, arguing that the figure was too high, regulators responded by raising their recommendation to $350 million. 

"At that point, {First Interstate} decided it was the better part of valor not to negotiate further," said one industry official close to the talks.
Thomas P. Marrie, chief financial officer, wouldn't comment about the details of the negotiations.
He said the provision "wasn't forced upon us, but the regulators made it very clear what they thought was an appropriate number." 

The tough regulatory stance portends large future losses, especially at the state's thrifts.
At least six of Arizona's 12 savings and loan institutions have either been taken over by the government's conservatorship program or are essentially insolvent; they are sitting on enormous unrecognized losses. 

For example, Western Savings & Loan Association, which is now in conservatorship, had tangible capital-assets minus liabilities -- of a negative $357.4 million at June 30.
It had a $258.9 million loss in the second quarter.
Yet it still held $916.3 million of repossessed real estate, for which it maintains no reserves whatsoever.
It also had $479.7 million of past-due loans; its level of reserves against those wasn't immediately available, though it is believed to be small. 

The rapid deterioration of the Arizona thrifts only adds to the ever-swelling cost of the government's massive thrift bailout, officially estimated at about $166 billion.
Together, the six government-controlled or essentially insolvent Arizona thrifts have tangible capital of a negative $1.5 billion, foreclosed property of $1.8 billion and pastdue loans of $1.63 billion. 

They have no reserves against the real estate, and their reserves against the loans are miniscule compared with the levels of reserves banks are moving to set up.
The thrifts had a combined loss of $487.8 million in the second quarter.
Other lenders have been recovering only 50 cents to 60 cents on the dollar on foreclosed Arizona property, if they can sell it at all. 

All this havoc is the result of one of the worst busts in Arizona's boom-and-bust history, compounded by some of the usual suspects in 1980s banking debacles: greed, fraud and plain bad banking.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, lenders and developers poured money into office buildings, condominiums and massive tracts of raw desert land, confident that Arizona's population would grow at annual rates of 4% to 6% for years to come.
Now, annual population growth is running at about 2% a year, some desert tracts bought three years ago for $90,000 an acre are being sold at $25,000 an acre and Phoenix has a seven-year supply of unoccupied office space. 

"It's horrible to say, but it's unfortunate that earthquake wasn't in Phoenix -- it might have knocked out some of our empty buildings," said C.W. Jackson, a prominent Arizona businessman with interests in real estate, banking and many other businesses. 

Many Arizona real-estate experts think the worst may be yet to come.
Ralph Shattuck, publisher of Foreclosure Update newsletter, said foreclosures have climbed to about 1,482 a month just in Maricopa County, where Phoenix is located.
That's up from about 687 a month in 1985, and it's accelerating: So far this month, foreclosures are averaging about 85 a day. "It's frightening," Mr. Shattuck said. 

Moreover, Mr. Shattuck and others said residential real estate, which had remained fairly strong through most of the downturn, is beginning to comprise more and more of the foreclosures.
And the generally frail condition of Arizona's lenders means there is little capital available in the state to shore up the economy and slow down the slide. 

"It's reasonable to say there is not a solvent S&L in the state and the amount of viable bank capital is very low," said Mr. Jackson. "We're going to see another big wave of failures and defaults between now and year-end. . . . The only thing a lot of these lenders can get out of their mouth now is: `Pay me in 60 days. '" 

First Interstate had a $214.4 million loss in 1988's third quarter, mainly from writedowns and reserves connected with its Texas operations.
For the six months ended June 30, it reported net income of $234.3 million, or $4.83 a share, including $46 million from tax credits and accounting changes. 

The bank's Arizona unit holds about $6 billion of First Interstate's $50 billion of assets.
Mr. Marrie said the bank expects Arizona real-estate prices, which plummeted 40% over the last year, to fall another 20% before stabilizing.
Some in Arizona think that may be optimistic.
First Interstate said its operations outside of Arizona "achieved results as expected for the quarter," but didn't specify the results. 

First Interstate stock closed at $57.625, down 25 cents, in composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange.
Since its unsuccessful bid for BankAmerica Corp. in 1986, the bank has undertaken a major restructuring in an effort to cut costs and boost performance, but many industry officials believe it may be ripe for a takeover bid, especially with interstate banking set to begin in California in 1991.
Mr. Marrie said the problems in Arizona have only "increased our resolve to continue to make our restructuring even more effective." 

Separately, Standard & Poor's Corp. lowered its ratings on Valley National Corp. 's senior debt to double-B from double-B-plus, affecting about $300 million of long-term debt.
S&P also lowered ratings on unsecured deposits and issues backed by a letter of credit from the bank holding company's principal unit, Valley National Bank of Arizona.
The ratings service said the downgrades reflect the continued slide in the company's financial condition. 

A spokesman for Phoenix, Ariz.-based Valley National, said the concern will be able to withstand the current downturn in Arizona real estate.
Commercial paper holders have reinvested their funds, he said, and consumer deposits have been up in the last few days. 

