.START 

This city is girding for gridlock today as hundreds of thousands of commuters avoid travel routes ravaged by last week's earthquake. 

Estimates of damage in the six-county San Francisco Bay area neared $5 billion, excluding the cost of repairing the region's transportation system. 

The Bay Bridge, the main artery into San Francisco from the east, will be closed for at least several weeks.
Part of the bridge collapsed in the quake, which registered 6.9 on the Richter scale.
The bridge normally carries 250,000 commuters a day.
Also, most of the ramps connecting the city to its main link to the south, the 101 freeway, have been closed for repairs. 

The Bay Area Rapid Transit system, which runs subway trains beneath the bay, is braced for a doubling of its daily regular ridership to 300,000.
BART has increased service to 24 hours a day in preparation for the onslaught. 

Most unusual will be water-borne commuters from the East Bay towns of Oakland and Berkeley.
For the first time in 32 years, ferry service has been restored between the East Bay and San Francisco.
The Red and White Fleet, which operates regular commuter ferry service to and from Marin County, and tourist tours of the bay, is offering East Bay commuters a chance to ride the waves for the price of $10 round-trip. 

That tariff is too stiff for some Financial District wage earners. "I'll stay with BART," said one secretary, swallowing her fears about using the transbay tube. 

Officials expect the Golden Gate Bridge to be swamped with an extra load of commuters, including East Bay residents making a long detour. "We're anticipating quite a traffic crunch," said one official.
About 23,000 people typically travel over the Golden Gate Bridge during commute hours.
About 130,000 vehicles cross during a 24-hour period. 

Meetings canceled by Apple Computer Inc. 's European sales force and by other groups raised the specter of empty hotel rooms and restaurants.
It also raised hackles of the city's tourism boosters. "Other cities are calling {groups booked here for tours and conferences} and -- not to be crass -- stealing our booking list," said Scott Shafer, a spokesman for Mayor Art Agnos. 

City officials stuck by their estimate of $2 billion in damage to the quake-shocked city.
The other five Bay area counties have increased their total damage estimates to $2.8 billion.
All estimates exclude highway repair, which could exceed $1 billion. 

Among the expensive unknowns are stretches of elevated freeway in San Francisco that were closed because of quake-inflicted damage. 

The most worrisome stretch is 1.2 miles of waterfront highway known as the Embarcadero Freeway.
Until it was closed Tuesday, it had provided the quickest series of exits for commuters from the Bay Bridge heading into the Financial District.
Engineers say it will take at least eight months to repair the Embarcadero structure. 

As part of the quake recovery effort, the city Building Department has surveyed about 3,000 buildings, including all of the Financial District's high-rises. 

The preliminary conclusion from a survey of 200 downtown high-rises is that "we were incredibly lucky," said Lawrence Kornfield, San Francisco's chief building inspector.
While many of these buildings sustained heavy damage, little of that involved major structural damage.
City building codes require construction that can resist temblors. 

In England, Martin Leach, a spokesman for Lloyd's of London, said the insurance market hasn't yet been able to estimate the total potential claims from the disaster. "The extent of the claims won't be known for some time," Mr. Leach said. 

On Friday, during a visit to California to survey quake damage, President Bush promised to "meet the federal government's obligation" to assist relief efforts. 

California officials plan to ask Congress for $3 billion or more of federal aid, in the form of grants and low-interest loans.
The state has a $1 billion reserve, and is expected to add $1 billion to that fund in the next year.
Some of that money will be available for highway repair and special emergency aid, but members of the legislature are also mulling over a temporary state gasoline tax to raise money for earthquake relief.
However, state initiatives restrict the ability of the legislature to raise such taxes unless the voters approve in a statewide referendum. 

G. Christian Hill and Ken Wells contributed to this article. 

