.START 

The Bakersfield Supermarket went out of business last May.
The reason was not high interest rates or labor costs.
Nor was there a shortage of customers in the area, the residential Inwood section of northern Manhattan.
The business closed when the owner was murdered by robbers. 

The owner was Israel Ortiz, a 29-year-old entrepreneur and father of two.
In his first year of operating the store he bought for $220,000, Mr. Ortiz was robbed at least twice at gunpoint.
The first time he was shot in the hand as he chased the robbers outside.
The second time he identified two robbers, who were arrested and charged.
Two weeks later -- perhaps in retaliation -- Mr. Ortiz was shot three times in the back, during what police classified as a third robbery attempt. 

That was his reward for working until 11 p.m. seven days a week to cover his $3,000 a month rent.
For providing what his customers described as very personal and helpful service.
For creating a focus for neighborhood life. 

Israel Ortiz is only one of the thousands of entrepreneurs and their employees who will be injured or killed by crime this year.
The U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that almost 2% of all retail-sales workers suffer injuries from crime each year, almost twice the national average and about four times the rate for teachers, truck drivers, medical workers and door-to-door salespeople.
Only a few other occupations have higher reported rates of criminal injury, such as police, bartenders and taxi drivers. 

Yet these figures show only the most visible part of the problem.
Recent data from New York City provide more of the picture.
While by no means the highest crime community in the country, New York is a prime example of a city where crime strangles small-business development.
A survey of small businesses there was conducted this spring by Interface, a policy research organization.
It gave 1,124 businesses a questionnaire and analyzed 353 responses.
The survey found that over a three-year period 22% of the firms said employees or owners had been robbed on their way to or from work or while on the job.
Seventeen percent reported their customers being robbed.
Crime was the reason that 26% reported difficulty recruiting personnel and that 19% said they were considering moving. 

More than one-third of the responding businesses said they suffer from drug dealing and loitering near their premises.
In Brooklyn and the Bronx, one out of four commercial firms is burglarized each year.
Industrial neighborhoods fare even worse, with burglary rates twice the citywide average. 

Crime is clearly more deadly to small-scale entrepreneurship than to big businesses.
Two decades ago, the Small Business Administration reported Yale Prof. Albert Reiss's landmark study of crime against 2,500 small businesses drawn from national IRS records.
He found that monetary crime losses, as a proportion of gross receipts, were 37 times higher for small businesses than for large ones. 

The New York study's companies averaged 27 employees; their annual crime losses averaged about $15,000, with an additional $8,385 annual cost in security -- enough money to hire at least one more worker.
The costs of crime may also be enough to destroy a struggling business. 

Whatever the monetary crime losses, they may not be nearly as important to entrepreneurs as the risk of personal injury.
After repeated gun robberies, some entrepreneurs may give up a business out of fear for their lives.
One Washington couple recently sold their liquor store after 34 years in business that included four robbery deaths and 16 robberies or burglaries on the premises. 

These findings illustrate the vicious cycle that National Institute of Justice Director James K. Stewart calls "crime causing poverty." Underclass neighborhoods offer relatively few employment opportunities, contributing to the poverty of local residents.
Small neighborhood businesses could provide more jobs, if crime were not so harmful to creating and maintaining those businesses.
This may help explain why small businesses create 65% of all jobs nationally, but only 22% of jobs in a crime-ridden city like New York. 

Bigger business can often better afford to minimize the cost of crime.
The New York study found that the cost of security measures in firms with fewer than five employees was almost $1,000 per worker, compared with one-third that amount for firms with more than 10 employees. 

The shift of retailing to large shopping centers has created even greater economies of scale for providing low-crime business environments.
Private security guards and moonlighting police can invoke the law of trespass to regulate access to these quasi-public places.
Since 1984, in fact, revenues of the 10 largest guard companies, primarily serving such big businesses, have increased by almost 62%. 

Few small neighborhood businesses, however, can afford such protection, even in collaboration with other local merchants.
In the neighborhoods with the highest crime rates, small business generally relies on the public police force for protection.
This creates several problems.
One is that there are not enough police to satisfy small businesses.
The number one proposal for reducing crime in the New York survey was to put more police on foot or scooter patrol, suggested by more than two-thirds of the respondents.
Only 22% supported private security patrols funded by the merchants themselves. 

A second problem is the persistent frustration of false alarms, which can make urban police less than enthusiastic about responding to calls from small businesses.
Only half the New York small businesses surveyed, for their part, are satisfied with the police response they receive. 

Some cities, including New York, have experimented with special tax districts for commercial areas that provide additional patrols funded by local businesses.
But this raises added cost barriers to urban entrepreneurship. 

Another solution cities might consider is giving special priority to police patrols of small-business areas.
For cities losing business to suburban shopping centers, it may be a wise business investment to help keep those jobs and sales taxes within city limits.
Increased patrolling of business zones makes sense because urban crime is heavily concentrated in such "hot spots" of pedestrian density.
With National Institute of Justice support, the Minneapolis police and the Crime Control Institute are currently testing the effects of such a strategy, comparing its deterrence value with traditional random patrols. 

Small-business patrols would be an especially helpful gesture whenever a small-business person is scheduled to testify against a robbery suspect.
While no guarantee, an increased police presence might even deter further attacks. 

It might even have saved the life, and business, of Israel Ortiz. 

Mr. Sherman is a professor of criminology at the University of Maryland and president of the Crime Control Institute in Washington, D.C. 

(See related story: "Commercial Oases in the Inner City" -- WSJ Oct. 23, 1989) 

