.START 

Ducks.
If the White House spots one, it intends to fire a veto at it. 

Ducks are this season's word for new taxes, under OMB Director Richard Darman's formulation that "if it looks like a duck, walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it's a duck." George Bush is quite clear: No new ducks. 

But what about all those non-duck ducks flapping over Washington?
We see a whole flock of programs that will impose significant costs on the American economy in the form of burdensome regulation and higher liabilities.
Federal child care (quack).
The Clean Air bill (quack).
The disabled-workers bill (quack, quack). 

The Bush White House is breeding non-duck ducks the same way the Nixon White House did: It hops on an issue that is unopposable -- cleaner air, better treatment of the disabled, better child care.
It comes up with a toned-down version of a Democratic proposal.
The bill gets signed into law and then the administration watches helplessly, wondering where all the "unexpected" costs came from. 

Consider, for instance, the very fat fowl known as federalized child care.
The President came up with a good bill, but now may end up signing the awful bureaucratic creature hatched on Capitol Hill.
It would create 38,000 local day-care commissions, answerable to the Department of Health and Human Services.
They'd determine where parents could store their kids during the day, and they'd regulate the storage facilities.
The initial costs are said to be in the $2 billion a year range, but that's only the beginning.
New entitlements tend to grow, creating a rationale for new taxes.
Quack. 

The administration claims that its Clean Air bill will cost businesses between $14 billion and $19 billion annually, but economist Michael Evans estimates that the costs for firms will actually be in the $60 billion a year range. 

The House bill also distorts economic efficiency in all sorts of perverse ways.
For example, the administration proposal imposes extremely tough emissions standards on new power plants.
So instead of building more efficient modern plants, utilities stick scrubbers on the old plants.
The money spent on scrubbers is diverted from planned research on new, cleaner technology. 

The bill also imposes the California auto-emissions standards on all cars nationwide, as if a car registered in Big Sky, Montana, needed to be as clean as one driven in Los Angeles.
Proponents of the nationwide standards say the cost for car buyers would be about $500 per car.
Other analysts say that estimate is low.
Quack. 

Nobody knows how many billions of dollars the Americans With Disabilities Act will cost, because nobody knows what the bill entails.
It is an intentionally vague document that will create a wave of litigation.
Judges will write the real bill as suits roll through the courts.
Lawyers will benefit.
Private companies, and ultimately their customers, will end up footing the huge bill. 

The effect of Nixon era non-duck ducks was an economy clogged up with regulations and distortions.
All this was recognized and documented in the succeeding years by economists, some of whom worked in the Reagan administration to lift this burden from the American people, states and local governments. 

Running for President in 1980 and 1988, George Bush also persuasively diagnosed the economic stagnation of the 1970s.
In fact, during last year's campaign, the entire nation constantly heard Mr. Bush tout his accomplishments as head of the Task Force on Regulatory Relief. 

"Government continues to inhibit the productivity of our citizenry and the international competitiveness of American business," the vice president declared when he was head of the task force. 

But with the impending passage of these new programs, Mr. Bush will surely be sending many people hurtling back into the regulatory thicket that he had helped cut back.
By 1986, the number of federal regulators was down to about 103,000.
Then it turned up, and by one estimate the number will be up to about 109,000 regulators by next year. 

Holding the dam on taxes is the most important task of the Bush presidency.
We would have thought by now, though, that there was a significant core of people involved in government life who understood that direct taxation isn't the only way to slow down an economy.
It is merely the most obvious.
What is even more ironic is that all over the world nations are learning that well-intentioned public programs often backfire.
But while they are unloading these burdens, the United States is close to creating three more big ones. 

The Bush administration ought to be setting aside some of its buckshot for the non-duck ducks. 

