.START 

For Cathay Pacific Airways, the smooth ride may be ending. 

The first signs of trouble came last month when the Hong Kong carrier, a subsidiary of Swire Pacific Ltd., posted a 5% drop in operating profit for the first six months and warned that margins will remain under pressure for the rest of the year. 

Securities analysts, many of whom scrapped their buy recommendations after seeing Cathay's interim figures, believe more jolts lie ahead.
Fuel and personnel costs are rising, and tourism in and through Hong Kong remains clouded by China's turmoil since the June 4 killings in Beijing. 

In addition, delivery delays for the first two of as many as 28 Boeing 747-400s that the carrier has ordered have raised costs because personnel had been hired to man the planes.
And tough competition in the air-freight market is cutting into an important sideline. 

There also is concern that once Hong Kong reverts to China's sovereignty in 1997, Cathay will be forced to play second fiddle to China's often-disparaged flag carrier, Civil Aviation Administration of China, or CAAC. 

"The sense is we would never be in a position again where everything works for us the way it did before," says Rod Eddington, Cathay's commercial director. 

Sarah Hall, an analyst at James Capel (Far East) Ltd., says there isn't much Cathay can do about rising costs for jet fuel, Hong Kong's tight labor market, or the strengthening of the local currency, which is pegged to the U.S. dollar.
These factors are further complicated by the airline's push to transform itself from a regional carrier to an international one, Ms. Hall says. 

Ms. Hall expects Cathay's profit to grow around 13% annually this year and next.
In 1988, it earned $2.82 billion Hong Kong (US$361.5 million) on revenue of HK$11.79 billion. 

Cathay is taking several steps to bolster business.
One step is to beef up its fleet.
In addition to aircraft from Boeing Co., Cathay announced earlier this year an order for as many as 20 Airbus A330-300s.
The expansion, which could cost as much as US$5.7 billion over the next eight years, will expand the fleet to about 43 planes by 1991, up from 30 at the end of last year, according to Sun Hung Kai Securities Ltd. 

The fuel-efficient Airbus planes will be used largely to replace Cathay's aging fleet of Lockheed Tristars for regional flights, while the Boeing aircraft will be used on long-haul routes to Europe and North America. 

Cathay also is moving some of its labor-intensive data-processing operations outside Hong Kong.
Fierce bidding for young employees in Hong Kong is pushing up Cathay's labor costs by 20% a year for low-level staff, while experienced, skilled employees are leaving the colony as part of the brain drain.
Some jobs already have been moved to Australia, and there are plans to place others in Canada.
David Bell, a spokesman for the airline, says the move is partly aimed at retaining existing staff who are leaving to secure foreign passports ahead of 1997. 

Cathay is working to promote Hong Kong as a destination worth visiting on its own merits, rather than just a stopover.
Although the June 4 killings in Beijing have hurt its China flights, Cathay's other routes have retained high load factors.
Mr. Eddington regards promoting Hong Kong as an important part of attracting visitors from Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, where the number of people looking to travel abroad has surged. 

There also has been speculation that Cathay will be among the major private-sector participants in the Hong Kong government's plans to build a new airport, with the carrier possibly investing in its own terminal.
Cathay officials decline to comment on the speculation. 

Mr. Eddington sees alliances with other carriers -- particularly Cathay's recent link with AMR Corp. 's American Airlines -- as an important part of Cathay's strategy.
But he emphasizes that Cathay hasn't any interest in swapping equity stakes with the U.S. carrier or with Lufthansa, the West German airline with which it has cooperated for about a decade.
Analysts believe Cathay is approached for such swaps by other carriers on a regular basis, particularly as the popularity of share exchanges has grown among European carriers. 

"We think alliances are very important," Mr. Eddington says. "But we'd rather put funds into our own business rather than someone else's.
I'm not sure cross-ownership would necessarily make things smoother." 

In a pattern it aims to copy in several key U.S. destinations, Cathay recently announced plans to serve San Francisco by flying into American Airlines' Los Angeles hub and routing continuing passengers onto a flight on the U.S. carrier. 

"We'll never have a big operation in the U.S., and they'll never have one as big as us in the Pacific," Mr. Eddington says. "But this way, American will coordinate good extensions to Boston, New York, Chicago and Dallas.
We'll coordinate on this end to places like Bangkok, Singapore and Manila." 

Asian traffic, which currently accounts for 65% of Cathay's business, is expected to continue as the carrier's mainstay.
Cathay has long stated its desire to double its weekly flights into China to 14, and it is applying to restart long-canceled flights into Vietnam.
Further expansion into southern Europe is also possible, says Mr. Bell, the spokesman. 

While a large number of Hong Kong companies have reincorporated offshore ahead of 1997, such a move isn't an option for Cathay because it would jeopardize its landing rights in Hong Kong.
And Mr. Eddington emphatically rules out a move to London: "Our lifeblood is Hong Kong traffic rights." 

He says the airline is putting its faith in the Sino-British agreement on Hong Kong's return to China.
A special section dealing with aviation rights states that landing rights for Hong Kong's airlines, which include the smaller Hong Kong Dragon Airlines, will continue to be negotiated by Hong Kong's government.
But critics fret that post-1997 officials ultimately will be responsible to Beijing. 

"My feeling is {Cathay doesn't} have a hope in the long run," says an analyst, who declines to be identified. "Cathay would love to keep going, but the general sense is they're going to have to do something." 

Mr. Eddington acknowledges that the carrier will have to evolve and adapt to local changes, but he feels that the Sino-British agreement is firm ground to build on for the foreseeable future. "We're confident that it protects our route structure," he says, "and our ability to grow and prosper." 

