.START 

The neighborhood around Alexander Haagen Co. 's Vermont-Slauson Shopping Center in the Watts section of Los Angeles resembles the crime-ridden, deteriorating sections of many inner cities and certainly isn't the sort of area one would choose to visit.
But turn into the shopping center's parking lot, and one could be in the safe, busy mall of a prosperous suburb.
Only it is safer, and busier. 

Over the past year there have been only one burglary, three thefts of or from autos, no purse-snatchings, and one attempted robbery in the mall, which opened in late 1981.
A shopping center of similar size in an affluent Los Angeles suburb would, per year, be expected to have eight burglaries, 70 thefts of or from autos, and four robberies.
The Watts mall has annual sales of more than $350 per leasable square foot; the figure for a comparable suburban shopping center would be $200.
Three other Haagen shopping centers in the Watts area are doing almost as well. 

A successful low-crime mall in a high-crime area violates the more typical inner-city pattern, in which commercial areas are taken over by unruly youth, gangs, and the criminal element, with an erosion of the customer base, development capital, and insurability.
Major regional and national chain stores are replaced by mom-and-pop operations offering poorer-quality merchandise at higher prices.
Along with the exodus of shopping opportunities is an exodus of the jobs that the major chains used to provide to community residents. 

Thus there is even more to the Vermont-Slauson Center than a good place to shop.
This defensible commercial zone becomes, for the residents, a secure oasis in a barren urban landscape, evidence that community decay is not inevitable and that the gangs are not invincible.
The center improves the community image to outsiders as well, and may help to arrest, or even reverse, the exodus of capital and investment. 

An additional benefit is the creation of jobs.
This starts in the construction phase through the use of minority contractors and local workers.
It continues through the life of the center; the Vermont-Slauson Center has created 500 permanent private-sector jobs at a one-time cost in public funds of only $2,500 per job.
As many of these jobs are filled by local residents, who move from the welfare rolls to the tax rolls, the $2,500-per-job public investment should repay itself in a few years.
And that is before consideration of increased state and local revenues from taxes and fees on sales, real estate, licenses and the like. 

Profits are also plowed back into the community; the non-profit Vermont-Slauson Economic Development Corp. receives 60% of the profits from the Vermont-Slauson Center and uses the money to provide moderate and low-cost housing in the community -- now running into the hundreds of units -- as well as commercial and industrial development projects. 

Bradford Crowe, director of the mayor's City Economic Development Office, says: "There is no question that Vermont-Slauson had a halo effect on the surrounding neighborhood.
What had been a deteriorated area with nothing but wig shops and shoe shops is now experiencing a major upgrading in the housing and commercial stock, thanks to a continuously replenished source of revitalization capital that Vermont-Slauson yields." 

Another benefit is that substantial percentages of the proprietors in these centers are minority businessmen and women.
In the Grand Boulevard Plaza developed by Matanky Realty Group in Chicago's Third Ward, opposite the Robert Taylor Homes, 29% of the stores to date have been leased to blacks and 14% to members of other minority groups.
Children from the community will have worthier role models than the drug kingpins. 

So what's the catch?
Primarily that putting one of these inner-city deals together takes time, patience, breadth of vision and negotiating skills that not all developers possess.
Security costs are also quite high. 

One of these centers can involve years of negotiating with numerous public agencies, local political leaders, and citizen groups, and with prospective tenants and sources of financing.
Suburban deals are not without their delays and complications -- inner-city deals just have more of them. 

Security at a typical Haagen inner-city center is impressive, but unobtrusive.
The entire site is enclosed by a 6-to-8-foot-high ornamental iron fence with a small number of remote-controlled gates.
Shrubs and flowers give it a pleasing and non-fortress-like appearance.
Infrared motion detectors and closed-circuit TV cameras monitor the entire center; lighting levels are three to five times the industry standard.
The security command post, camouflaged as second-story retail space, has its own "crow's nest" above the roofs of the other buildings, with a panoramic view of the entire center.
Local law enforcement is present in a sub-station occupying space donated by the center.
These features are also used in Matanky Realty Group's Grand Boulevard Plaza.
Haagen has its own large security force of well-trained and well-paid personnel on round-the-clock duty at each center.
Security is 60% to 70% of the common area charges of these centers, vs. an industry average of about 15%. 

These security costs are kept off-budget because the centers' site acquisition, construction, and financing costs were reduced by such programs as Urban Development Action Grants, Economic Development Administration Grants, Community Development Block Grants, tax-free Industrial Development Bonds, Enterprise Zone tax write-offs, city infrastructure grants, and tax increment financing. 

Many of these programs no longer exist, or have been severely cut back.
However, since these centers appear to pay for themselves, there is nothing to prevent state and local governments from enacting legislation with similar provisions. 

Many states already have Enterprise Zones and legislation that combines tax incentives, loans, and grants to encourage investment in depressed areas with requirements for the hiring of the unemployed and minorities.
These programs could be expanded to focus on funds for project planning, identifying sources of funds, and for acquiring a site and preparing it.
Combatting crime and the fear of it in inner-city commercial areas should give Enterprise Zones more success than most have enjoyed to date. 

With many suburban areas basically overbuilt with shopping centers, inner-city areas may represent a major new untapped market for investment.
New approaches to mall design and operation make it possible to tap these markets.
If the risks and rewards are reasonable, developers will respond.
Government officials who wonder how important it is for them to encourage development in high-risk areas should visit Vermont-Slauson and Grand Boulevard Plaza and decide for themselves.
The answer will be obvious. 

Mr. Titus is a researcher at the Justice Department's National Institute of Justice. 

(See related story: "Small Merchants' Big Burdens" -- WSJ Oct. 23, 1989) 

