.START 

A bill that would permit the Securities and Exchange Commission to monitor the financial condition of securities firms' holding companies is facing tough opposition from some Wall Street firms, which argue that the legislation is unnecessary. 

The legislation and other issues related to the stock market will be the focus of hearings this week by the House Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee and the Senate Securities Subcommittee. 

Richard Breeden, the new chairman of the SEC, hasn't taken a formal position on the bill, which would also require investors to disclose large trades and give the SEC additional authority during market emergencies.
However, he recently told the Senate Banking Committee that he believes the agency should have explicit authority to monitor debt levels at holding companies and affiliates of broker-dealers, which are frequently used to issue bridge loans. 

The bridge loans are intended to provide temporary financing for acquisitions.
Since such loans are often refinanced through the sale of high-risk, high-yield junk bonds, the recent woes of the junk-bond market have renewed concerns among regulators about the risks associated with Wall Street firms issuing bridge loans. 

But some Wall Street executives argue that such fears are unwarranted.
In a July 6 letter to the Senate Securities Subcommittee, First Boston Corp. argued that the fact that no retail brokerage firm failed during the 1987 market crash demonstrates that current rules are adequate. 

First Boston, whose holding company, CS First Boston Group, is one of the larger issuers of bridge loans on Wall Street, said it is also concerned that once the SEC has the power to monitor holding companies, it will try to regulate their activities. 

"The proposal, while well-intended, I think can be dangerously misleading because the likely consequence would be to weaken, rather than strengthen the control the SEC has exercised for 50 years over the financial adequacy and viability of broker-dealers," Michael Raoul-Duval, managing director of First Boston, said in an interview. 

The bill would "divert scarce resources of the commission away from broker-dealers into areas which simply have no way of affecting broker-dealers," Mr. Raoul-Duval said. 

Sources in the industry and on Capitol Hill say a compromise that would placate the industry while addressing the SEC's concerns may be possible.
An aide to the Senate Securities Subcommittee says some legislators support the concept of risk disclosure, but adds: "nobody is wedded to the language in the bill." 

Edward O'Brien, president of the Securities Industry Association, said that the securities-industry trade group opposes the bill as it is written but that it is "hopeful a compromise can be reached to achieve the SEC's goals." 

Mr. O'Brien will elaborate on the SIA's position in testimony before the House Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee this week, a spokesman said. 

