.START 

The collapse of a $6.79 billion buy-out of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. has handed Wall Street's takeover stock speculators their worst loss ever on a single deal. 

Their $700 million-plus in estimated paper losses easily tops the $400 million in paper losses the takeover traders, known as arbitragers, suffered in 1982 when Gulf Oil Co. dropped a $4.8 billion offer for Cities Service Co. 

In the six trading days since the UAL labor-management buy-out group failed to get bank financing, culminating Friday with the withdrawal of its partner British Airways PLC, UAL stock has plummeted by 41% to 168 1/2 from 285 1/4. 

The arbs may recoup some of their paper losses if the UAL deal gets patched up again, as they did in 1982 when Occidental Petroleum Co. rescued them with a $4 billion takeover of Cities Service. 

In the meantime, the question faced by investors is: What is UAL stock worth? 

The short answer, on a fundamental basis, is that airline analysts say the stock is worth somewhere between $135 and $150 a share.
That's based on a multiple of anywhere between 8.5 to 10 times UAL earnings, which are estimated to come in somewhere around $16 a share this year. 

Airline stocks typically sell at a discount of about one-third to the stock market's price-earnings ratio -- which is currently about 13 times earnings.
That's because airline earnings, like those of auto makers, have been subject to the cyclical ups-and-downs of the economy. 

That analysis matches up with stock traders' reports that, despite the huge drop in the stock, UAL hasn't returned to the level at which it could attract buying by institutions solely on the basis of earnings. 

So anyone buying the stock now is betting on some special transaction such as a recapitalization or takeover, and must do so using some guesswork about the likelihood of such an event. 

One analyst, who asked not to be identified, said he believes that the UAL pilots and management can put together a bid "in the $225 area," but that it could take three to four months to close.
At that level, and given the uncertainty, he believes UAL stock should trade closer to 

Other observers note that UAL's board, having accepted a bid of $300 a share, might hold out for a new bid much closer to the original level -- even if it means that the management goes back to running the company for a while and lets things return to normal.
By that logic, the closing of a deal could be much further away than three to four months, even though the eventual price might be higher. 

Investment bankers following UAL agree that the strongest impetus for an eventual deal is that the pilots have been attempting a buy-out for more than two years, and aren't likely to stop, having come so close to success. 

The pilots have a strong financing tool in their willingness to cut their annual compensation by $200 million, and to commit $200 million from their retirement funds.
On Friday, they also persuaded the UAL flight attendants to join them. 

However, investment bankers say that banks aren't likely to lend the almost $5 billion that would be necessary for a takeover even at a lower price without someone putting up a hefty wad of cash -- probably even greater than the 17% in cash put up by investors in the leveraged takeover of Northwest Airlines parent NWA Corp. in July. 

Banks want to see someone putting up real cash at risk, that is, subordinate to the bank debt in any deal.
That way, they figure, someone else has an even stronger motivation to make sure the deal is going to work, because they would be losing their money before the banks lost theirs. 

Banks also want to be able to call someone on the telephone to fix a problem with a deal that goes bad -- preferably someone other than a union leader. 

That leaves the pilots still in need of cash totaling around $1 billion -- far more than either they or the flight attendants can lay their hands on from retirement funds alone. 

One obstacle to the pilots' finding such a huge amount of cash is their insistence on majority ownership.
Investors such as Marvin Davis of Los Angeles who have sought airline ownership this year have insisted they, not the pilots, must have control. 

One way out of that dilemma could be a partial recapitalization in which the pilots would wind up sharing the value of their concessions with public shareholders.
The pilots could borrow against the value of their concessions, using the proceeds to buy back stock from the public and give themselves the majority control they have been seeking. 

But it isn't clear that banks would lend sufficient money to deliver a big enough price to shareholders.
The lack of any new cash probably would still leave the banks dissatisfied.
In advising the UAL board on the various bids for the airline, starting with one for $240 a share from Mr. Davis, the investment bank of First Boston came up with a wide range of potential values for the company, depending on appraisal methods and assumptions. 

Using the the NWA takeover as a benchmark, First Boston on Sept. 14 estimated that UAL was worth $250 to $344 a share based on UAL's results for the 12 months ending last June 30, but only $235 to $266 based on a management estimate of results for 1989.
First Boston's estimates had been higher before management supplied a 1989 projection. 

Using estimates of the company's future earnings under a variety of scenarios, First Boston estimated UAL's value at $248 to $287 a share if its future labor costs conform to Wall Street projections; $237 to $275 if the company reaches a settlement with pilots similar to one at NWA; $98 to $121 under an adverse labor settlement, and $229 to $270 under a pilot contract imposed by the company following a strike. 

And using liquidation value assuming the sale of all UAL assets, First Boston estimated the airline is worth $253 to $303 a share. 

Unfortunately, all those estimates came before airline industry fundamentals deteriorated during the past month.
American Airlines parent AMR and USAir Group, both subject to takeover efforts themselves, have each warned of declining results. 

Some analysts don't expect a quick revival of any takeover by the pilots.
The deal has, as one takeover expert puts it, "so many moving parts.
I don't see anybody who's sophisticated getting his name associated with this mess until the moving parts stop moving." 

In addition to the need for another cash equity investor, the other moving parts include: the pilots themselves, who can scuttle rival deals by threatening to strike; the machinists union, the pilots' longtime rivals who helped scuttle the pilots' deal; and regulators in Washington, whose opposition to foreign airline investment helped throw the deal into doubt. 

In the meantime, the arbs are bleeding.
Wall Street traders and analysts estimate that takeover stock traders own UAL stock and options equal to as many as 6.5 million shares, or about 30% of the total outstanding.
Frank Gallagher, an analyst with Phoenix Capital Corp. in New York, estimates that the arbs paid an average of about $280 a share for their UAL positions.
That would indicate that the arbs have paper losses on UAL alone totalling $725 million. 

UAL Corp. 

(NYSE; Symbol: UAL) 

Business: Airline 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $8.98 billion 

Net income*: $599.9 million; or $20.20 a share 

Second quarter, June 30, 1989: Per-share earnings: $6.52 vs. $5.77 

Average daily trading volume: 

881,969 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 21.6 million 

*Continuing operations 

