.START 

McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. said it obtained "firm" financing commitments from three major banks in regard to its offer for 50.3% of LIN Broadcasting Corp. Morgan Guaranty Trust, Toronto-Dominion Bank and Provident National Bank, an affiliate of PNC Financial Corp., jointly committed $1.2 billion of financing, subject to certain conditions, McCaw said. 

Further, McCaw said the banks expressed confidence that the balance of the $4.5 billion bank facility will be committed within the next several weeks by a syndicate of foreign and domestic banks.
Morgan, Toronto-Dominion and Provident are leading that syndicate. 

McCaw is offering to buy 22 million shares of LIN for $125 each in cash, which would result in McCaw owning 50.3% of the cellular-phone and broadcasting concern.
The offer is in limbo, however, because LIN has agreed to merge its cellular-phone businesses with BellSouth Corp. 

In national over-the-counter trading Friday, LIN shares rose 62.5 cents to close at $110.625. 

Beijing lawmakers have called for jails to be built to house prostitutes and for severe punishment, including the death sentence, for anyone who induces or coerces women into prostitution. 

The official Xinhua News Agency said the municipal government was discussing a draft bill to give the capital its first anti-prostitution statutes.
It quoted Liu Changyi, deputy director of the Beijing Public Security Bureau, as saying that there were many more people involved in prostitution now than in 1985, when there were about 100 cases. 

Foreigners involved in prostitution will be punished according to the law, and those with sexually transmitted diseases will be expelled from the country, according to the regulations. 

The Communists nearly succeeded in eliminating prostitution after taking over in 1949, but the practice has returned in recent years with the country's increased exposure to the outside world. 

Japan agreed to enforce a decision by an international wildlife conference to ban all trade in ivory, a spokesman for the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said.
Earlier, Japan had said it might file a reservation against the ivory ban decided by ballot at the 103-nation United Nations Conference on International Trade in Endangered Species in Switzerland last week.
The Japanese use 40% of the world's ivory. 

Italy should close the Leaning Tower of Pisa because it's a danger to tourists, government-appointed experts said. "In some places the stonework is so damaged it shows signs of breaking off," scientists and technicians said in a report to Public Works Minister Giovanni Prandini.
Each year, nearly a million people pay about $3 to make the spiral climb up 294 steps to the top of the 800-year-old marble tower. 

East Germany pledged to reduce alcohol consumption by boosting production of soft drinks and fruit juices.
Trade and Supply Minister Gerhard Briksa said in a letter published in the youth daily Junge Welt that the rise in alcohol consumption in East Germany had been halted; but to reduce it further, he said, production and supply of other beverages, including fruit juices, should be stepped up.
He added that shops will have to continue reducing their stocks of liquor and avoid displaying them too prominently in the window. 

Hong Kong has built a detention center for illegal immigrants from China because China has refused for the past two weeks to accept them back.
The center, close to Hong Kong's border with China, will be ready today and will be able to house 1,000 inmates, Police Deputy Director Peter Wong said.
The dispute started when China, angry that Hong Kong had allowed dissident swimmer Yang Yang to flee to the U.S., halted the usual daily transfer of illegal immigrants caught in this British colony, which reverts to Beijing's control in 1997. 

Sweating under the glare of newly installed television lights, British members of Parliament demanded a halt to the experimental televising of debates.
A group of senior Conservative legislators, complaining the House of Commons was like a sauna, demanded that the experiment be stopped unless the intensity of the lights is reduced.
One Conservative MP, David Wilshire, said: "I should have a wonderful suntan by Christmas." Debates are due to be broadcast nationally starting Nov. 21 in a six-month experiment. 

A majority of Japanese banks are said to be wary of making new loans to Mexico under the Brady plan because they're uncertain the Mexican economy will remain stable. 

Instead, many small and medium-sized banks, and some larger ones, are likely to take one of the other two options open to them under the plan, Japanese banking officials said.
The plan, proposed by U.S. Secretary of State Nicholas Brady, calls for banks either to make new loans or to reduce the principle on existing loans or to cut the interest rate on those existing loans. 

The officials said that most Japanese banks prefer the losses they'd suffer in either of the latter options to the risk of new lending.
But an official at a long-term credit bank explained that since some larger banks have already taken loss provisions for loans to other Third World nations, further write-offs could be viewed as intolerable. "They can't take the hit" to their earnings, he said. 

As a result, the official said, they may be forced into a no-win situation in which they make risky loans that they could have to write off later. 

A poll in male-dominated South Korea put Margaret Thatcher first on a list of most-respected foreign leaders.
The British prime minister was the only woman singled out by respondents, who put Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in second place. . . . The Soviet newspaper Trud reported that Mickey Mouse will appear in a Russian-language comic book to be issued four times a year by Soviet publisher Fizkultura i Sport and Denmark's Gutenberghus Group.
The comic book will cost about $2. 

