.START 

Philip Morris Cos., whose Benson & Hedges cigarette brand has been losing market share, has asked at least one other agency to try its hand at creative work for the big account, which has been at Wells Rich Greene Inc. since 1966. 

Executives close to Philip Morris said that the tobacco and food giant has asked Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc., a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co., and possibly others to work on creative ideas for the account.
Several executives said another potential contender is WPP Group's Ogilvy & Mather agency, which works on some other Philip Morris products.
Both Philip Morris and Backer Spielvogel declined to comment.
A spokeswoman for Ogilvy & Mather said the agency doesn't comment on "idle speculation." 

Also mentioned as a contender was TBWA Advertising, but the company denied it was participating. 

The loss of the cigarette account would be a severe blow to Wells Rich.
Benson & Hedges has been one of its most high-visibility campaigns, as well as one of its largest clients.
The account billed almost $60 million last year, according to Leading National Advertisers.
But Philip Morris has scaled back ad spending on the brand over the past year, industry executives said, and it now bills about $30 million to $40 million. 

Industry executives said Philip Morris had asked the other agencies to create campaigns in a bid to stop the brand's slipping market share.
According to John Maxwell, an analyst at Wheat First Securities, Richmond, Va., Benson & Hedges has slipped from 4.7% of the cigarette market in 1985 to just 4.1% after the second quarter of this year.
The brand is No. 7 overall in the cigarette business, Mr. Maxwell said.
The slip has come despite high-profile ads created by Wells Rich, including one picturing a young man clad only in pajama bottoms interrupting a festive brunch.
That ad generated so much publicity that a trade magazine launched a contest for its readers to guess who the guy was and what he was doing. 

Wells Rich first popularized the Benson & Hedges brand more than 20 years ago with ads portraying, among other things, an elevator door closing on a passenger's cigarette.
The brand early on achieved an upscale appeal -- a trait that some analysts believe is partly responsible for its staid performance.
Philip Morris, trying to revive the Benson & Hedges franchise, put the account up for review in 1986.
Wells Rich Greene, however, in an effort directed by Mary Wells Lawrence, emerged the victor of the review and retained the business. 

Kenneth Olshan, Wells Rich's chairman, didn't return phone calls seeking comment. 

While Wells Rich recently picked up Hertz Corp. 's $25 million to $30 million account, it has lost a number of big accounts this year, including the $20 million to $25 million Cadbury-Schweppes Canada Dry and Sunkist accounts, the $18 million Procter & Gamble Co. Sure deodorant account and the $10 million Polo/Ralph Lauren business.
Its victories include more than $30 million in Sheraton Corp. business and an assignment from Dun & Bradstreet worth $5 million to $10 million. 

