.START 

Investors bailed out of New York City bonds in droves last week, driving prices lower and boosting yields. 

One bond trader estimated that more than $50 million of New York City general obligation bonds were put up for sale Friday alone.
While that represents a small percentage of the city's public debt outstanding, Friday's selling followed a weeklong effort to unload the bonds by a broad spectrum of institutional and individual investors. 

"I've never seen so many {New York City} G.O.'s up for sale," said another trader. "Every broker has blocks of every size and maturity." 

Municipal bond analysts said the sell-off was triggered by concerns about the city's financial health, rumors of a $900 million bond offering coming soon, and political uncertainty. 

A spokesman for the city wouldn't confirm the size of the bond issue, but did say that a general obligation offering is in the works and should be priced sometime in the next two weeks, before the November mayoral election. (General obligation bonds are backed by the city's overall revenues and credit.) 

Although many investors were aware that a bond offering was being scheduled, many expected a much smaller amount of bonds to be sold.
The fact that the city will issue such a large amount of debt was interpreted as a sign that New York's budgetary problems are more serious than had been expected.
New York, one of the nation's largest issuers of tax-exempt bonds, sold $750 million of municipal bonds just a few weeks ago. 

There have been reports for months that the city's economy is weakening, as the October 1987 stock market crash continues to make itself felt.
The recent sharp stock market decline exacerbated those concerns.
Meanwhile, tax revenues are falling while the city's spending needs are expanding.
Rumors persisted last week that New York's credit ratings -- single-A from Moody's Investors Service Inc. and single-A-minus from Standard & Poor's Corp. -- are at risk. 

The weakness in New York City bonds follows a warning from New York state Comptroller Edward Regan that the 1987 crash seriously weakened the city's economy.
In a study, the comptroller said, "The city's glory days are over." Mr. Regan warned mayoral candidates "to be prepared for limited options and constraints on service increases to address the city's problems in the next few years, due to the now-evident weakening in the New York City economy." 

New York City's revised financial plan, due out later this month, is expected to include measures to balance the city's $27 billion budget.
At present, analysts project a budget gap on the order of $500 million to $600 million for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1990, although the city's own budget analysts project a narrower deficit. 

Mark Page, New York's deputy director of finance, said that investors' concerns about the city's financial health are "unwarranted given our proven ability to manage ourselves." He charges the city's critics with spreading "unfounded emotional rhetoric." 

There are also questions about whether a new and inexperienced mayor can manage the city through what could become a financial crisis.
The leading contender for the mayoral office, Democrat David Dinkins, has been criticized recently for the way he handled his personal financial affairs.
And the controversy has led to uncertainty about the outcome of the election.
Until last week, Mr. Dinkins was considered a shoo-in. 

"The market can adjust to good news or bad news, but uncertainty drives people wild," said Bernard B. Beal, chief executive of M.R. Beal & Co., a securities firm that specializes in the municipal market.
Until last week, "Everyone felt certain they knew the outcome of the election.
Now, there have been a number of questions raised." 

Last week, yields on long-term New York City general obligation bonds jumped half a percentage point.
New York City's 6% bonds due 2018, for example, were quoted late Friday at a price to yield 7.80%, compared with 7.60% Thursday. 

As the yield on New York general obligation bonds rose, the Bond Buyer 20-bond general obligation index, the mostly widely followed gauge of the tax-exempt market, held steady at 7.19% in the week ended Oct. 19. 

