.START 

If growth regains its glamour among investors, a sluggish segment of the Nasdaq over-the-counter market could show some flash. 

Some stock pickers already are targeting the OTC market, where, they say, await plenty of small- and medium-sized growth stocks.
Best of all, they add, these growth issues, unlike their big blue-chip cousins on the New York Stock Exchange, are languishing at depressed prices. 

Growth stocks will return to favor, some analysts and money managers think, because of the jitters caused by the market's steep slide on Oct. 13, and because of the current swell of disappointing earnings announcements.
Against such a backdrop, companies with proven track records of earnings gains of 20% or so annually have extra appeal. 

"The market will have to look for a new theme now and that theme will be a return to growth," declares Mary Farrell, a PaineWebber analyst.
Among her OTC picks are Oshkosh B'Gosh and A&W Brands.
Like many OTC growth issues, they have market values -- as measured by stock price times shares outstanding -- of roughly $100 million to $500 million. 

Some like to specialize in growth companies whose shares haven't traded publicly very long.
These are sometimes dubbed "emerging" growth companies, though they also have expanding-profit track records. 

While many growth stocks are small, not all small stocks have earnings-growth momentum.
That's an important distinction because some analysts and brokers, who perennially predict that small stocks are about to outperform bigger issues, may use any spurt in growth issues to help them sell all small stocks. 

"You can find some good, quality companies over the counter," but investors should be selective, says John Palicka, chief portfolio manager at Midco Investors, a Newark, N.J., money management company with about $900 million invested in growth stocks of varying sizes.
Mr. Palicka's picks from the OTC market include Legent, Mail Boxes Etc., and Payco American. 

The main argument for growth stocks is their usually superior performance in a slowing economy. "If the market refocuses on earnings, we should get better valuations of growth stocks," says L. Keith Mullins, a growth-stock analyst at Morgan Stanley.
Eventually, he believes, investors will be willing to pay higher prices for companies with proven track records of earnings growth.
In anticipation of that shift, he and other analysts are encouraging their clients to buy such issues now. 

Understandably, smaller growth stocks haven't been in favor recently.
The average issue on Standard & Poor's 500-stock Index gained 35% last year, Ms. Farrell of PaineWebber says.
Smaller-stock earnings, by comparison, rose between 15% and 20%. 

In addition, earnings growth took a back seat to cash flow, restructuring and takeover potential, and breakup value as the preferred stock-picking standards for much of the year.
Also, the smaller growth stocks aren't widely traded, and so are harder to buy and sell quickly than blue chips. 

As a result, Morgan Stanley's Index of 40 Emerging Growth Stocks -- most of which are in the OTC market -- is up only 13% for the year, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average has leaped 24% and the S&P 500 has grown 25%.
The Nasdaq Composite has gained 23% this year, but that's largely due to the 100 largest nonfinancial stocks, which have soared 30%. 

Some investors are skeptical of growth stocks because investing in them means ignoring that maxim found in the fine print of some investment advertisements -- that past performance isn't indicative of future results. "People are naturally suspicious of them," says Mr. Mullins of Morgan Stanley.
Among his favorites in his firm's index are Legent, Silicon Graphics and Novell. 

However, more money managers are reassured that profit is regaining importance.
Mark Schoeppner, portfolio manager at Pittsburgh-based Quaker Capital Management, says that in reaction to nervousness about debt-laden buy-out transactions, analysts and investors now appear to be "valuing stock based on future earnings as opposed to the amount of debt the company can support." 

Barney Hallingby, managing director of research at Hambrecht & Quist, also believes earnings growth is beginning to play a greater part in investors' buying decisions.
On Friday, Hambrecht & Quist added St. Jude Medical to the list of 20 stocks it strongly recommends.
The opinion is largely based on the company's earnings momentum, Mr. Hallingby says. 

St. Jude's market value on Nasdaq exceeds $1 billion, so it isn't a small stock.
The medical devices maker's earnings rose nearly 35% in 1987 from 1986, and 75% in 1988.
Kurt Kruger, who follows the stock for Hambrecht & Quist, anticipates that the company's net income will grow 51% to $2.15 a share this year.
St. Jude finished up 1/4 to 44 1/2 on Friday. 

Friday's Market Activity 

The Nasdaq Composite Index eased 0.13 to 470.67.
The composite finished up 0.7% from last Friday's close. 

It was a busy week for OTC stocks.
Friday's volume totaled 158.2 million shares; the daily average for the week was a bustling 176.7 million. 

Valley National lost 1 3/8 to 17 1/8 on volume of 1.9 million shares.
The company reported a big third-quarter loss on Thursday. 

Merchants Bank of New York lost 1 to 106 after reporting that its third-quarter net income fell to $1.62 a share from last year's $1.67 a share. 

Eliot Savings Bank lost 7/8 to 1 5/8 after reporting that it had a $4.8 million loss in the latest third quarter mostly because of loan-loss provisions.
In the 1988 quarter, the bank earned $1.1 million. 

One bank stock was a winner.
BanPonce jumped 4 1/2 to 47 3/4 after agreeing to be acquired by Banco Popular de Puerto Rico for $56.25 a share.
Banco Popular, meanwhile, dropped 1 1/4 to 21 1/2. 

Sierra Tucson, an initial public offering, made the most active list.
The company's shares began trading at 12 1/2, up from its initial offering price of 12, and closed at 13.
Sierra Tucson operates an addiction treatment center. 

Among declining issues, a weak earnings outlook drove Groundwater Technology down 6 1/4 to 24.
The company said results for its second quarter ended Oct. 28 could drop as much as 20% below the 30 cents a share reported in the year-earlier quarter. 

Medstone International plummeted 3 1/4 to 7 1/4.
A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel has asked that Medstone perform more studies on its device to treat gallstones. 

Qintex Entertainment dropped 2 5/8 to 1 1/2 after seeking protection from creditor lawsuits under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code for itself and its two operating subsidiaries, Hal Roach Studios and Qintex Productions. 

Raymond Corp. lost 1 to 10 after it said late Thursday that it will take a $4.4 million charge in its third quarter for reserves to cover potential charges in connection with the closing and sale of a manufacturing plant.
As a result, the company has suspended its quarterly dividend. 

McCaw Cellular Communications and its target, LIN Broadcasting, were active.
LIN added 5/8 to 110 5/8 and McCaw lost 1/4 to 41.
McCaw said it has secured commitments from three banks to help finance its $125-a-share bid for 22 million of Lin's shares.
McCaw has called for a "fair auction" of LIN, which earlier entered a stock-swap merger pact with BellSouth. 

Following the release of the company's fourth-quarter earnings, Apple Computer dropped 3/4 to 48 on volume of more than 2.3 million shares.
Apple earned $161.1 million, or $1.24 a share, in the quarter, including $48 million from the sale of its Adobe Systems stock. 

