.START 

First, the somewhat affected idealism of the 1960s.
Then, the all-too-sincere opportunism of the 1970s and 1980s.
What now?
To judge from novels that mirror the contemporary scene, we're back in the age of anxiety.
Where '60s dropouts professed to scorn middle-class life and ambitious yuppies hoped to leave it far behind as they scaled the upper reaches of success, it now seems that so many people feel they're slipping between the cracks, that middle-class life is viewed with nostalgia or outright longing. 

Lisa Zeidner's third novel, "Limited Partnerships" (North Point Press, 256 pages, $18.95) is a stylish, funny and thoughtful look at the way love relationships are affected by the pressures of money, or, more specifically, the lack of it.
Nora Worth and Malcolm DeWitt, 33 and 39 respectively, live together in a townhouse in a transitional Philadelphia neighborhood.
Malcolm, a former film-maker turned architect, has just seen his first big chance at a lucrative commission turn to dust with the arrest of his shady, obnoxious client, a fly-by-night real estate developer.
Nora, who still has artistic aspirations, knows she is lucky to be working as a food stylist, prepping pies, burgers, frosty cold drinks and other comestibles to look as appetizing as possible in front of the camera.
After all, she reasons, "there were housewives with Nikons and degrees from cooking schools in France who would kill for her job." But Nora and Malcolm feel trapped.
They seem to be having the "worst of both worlds: artistic work with none of art's integrity and no control over the finished product; self-employment without fun or profit." 

It's a downbeat, "thirtysomething" world, in which bright, still youngish people are engaged in a glossy version of day labor, doing free-lance, semi-professional work that brings little satisfaction or security but that they know they should be grateful to do.
Uncertainty dogs every aspect of their lives.
Malcolm faces bankruptcy and an IRS audit, but Nora finds an extra $30,000 in her bank account, suddenly increasing her available funds some fifteenfold.
While she is wondering whether to live it up, and do something even more dramatic, say get married, her life is further complicated by the reappearance of an old flame, David, a film critic and actor who always seems to be just on the brink of stardom. 

In novels of an earlier vintage, David would have represented excitement and danger; Malcolm, placid, middle-class security.
The irony in this novel is that neither man represents a "safe" middle-class haven: Nora's decision is between emotional excitement and emotional security, with no firm economic base anywhere.
The characters confront a world in which it seems increasingly difficult to find a "middle way" between the extremes of success and failure, wealth and poverty. 

In making Malcolm and Nora such wonderfully representative specimens of their class and generation, Ms. Zeidner has somewhat neglected the task of making them distinctively individual characters.
The humor of the story owes much to the fact that no hearts (even the characters' own) are likely to bleed for the plight of health-food eaters.
But readers may well feel the pangs of recognition. 

In any case, the foundering middle classes aren't the only ones in trouble -- or whose troubles provide material for fiction. "Rascal Money" (Contemporary Books, 412 pages, $17.95), a novel by consultant and business analyst Joseph R. Garber, tells the story of an innovative, well-run, widely respected computer manufacturing company called PegaSys as it faces a hostile takeover attempt by AIW, a much smaller corporation that is so incompetently managed as to constitute a standing joke in the business world. 

Patrician, dynamic Scott Thatcher, founder and head of PegaSys, initially finds the takeover threat risible.
But, as he and his skilled team soon discover, they're up against two factors they hadn't counted on: first, a business climate in which a failing company with few assets and many debts can borrow against the assets of the successful company it hopes to acquire in order to finance the takeover; second, that standing behind AIW is a sinister consortium of much bigger, shadier and shrewder foreign interests secretly providing the money and muscle for the deal. 

Mr. Garber manages to invest this tale of financial wars with the colorful characters and fast-paced action of a suspense novel.
And like a spy or mystery story, this novel has strong elements of allegory, as the good and evil forces battle it out.
Mr. Garber depicts these moral qualities with the broad brush strokes of a satire that occasionally descends to the realm of cliched caricatures.
Standard-issue portraits of flaky Californians, snobbish homosexuals and Neanderthal union leaders undermine the force of the author's perceptions.
Yet the heavy-handedness of the satire also can be effective in a book like this: If the head of AIW were not portrayed as an utterly contemptible, malicious dolt, we would not much care whether his schemes were defeated, and would not be so diverted in the process. 

Ms. Rubin is a free-lance writer based in Los Angeles. 

