.START 

Groupe AG's chairman said the Belgian insurer is prepared to give up some of its independence to a white knight if necessary to repel a raider. 

Amid heavy buying of shares in Belgium's largest insurer, Maurice Lippens also warned in an interview that a white knight, in buying out a raider, could leave speculators with big losses on their AG stock.
Since the beginning of the year, the stock has nearly doubled, giving AG a market value of about 105 billion Belgian francs ($2.7 billion). 

The most likely white knight would be Societe Generale de Belgique S.A., which already owns 18% of AG and which itself is controlled by Cie.
Financiere de Suez, the acquisitive French financial conglomerate.
But Mr. Lippens said a rescue also could involve Asahi Mutual Life Insurance Co., which owns 5% of AG. 

AG is hardly alone in its anxiety.
A rambunctious shake-up is quickly reshaping Europe's once-stately insurance business.
Worried by European Community directives that will remove many of the barriers to cross-border insurance services, starting in mid-1990, insurers are rushing to find partners and preparing for price wars.
In West Germany and the Netherlands, insurers are flirting with banks.
In France, Suez and Axa-Midi Assurances S.A. both have been on the prowl for giant acquisitions; Suez last month acquired control of Groupe Victoire, the sixth-largest European insurance company, after a takeover battle with Cie. Industrielle. 

Mr. Lippens said the volume of shares changing hands has grown significantly since mid-September.
But he estimated that a raider would have been able to amass no more than 4% of the shares in recent months. 

Aside from exploring plans for joint ventures or acquisitions, Mr. Lippens has called top managers of companies rumored as potential raiders -- among them, Axa-Midi, Union des Assurances de Paris and Suez, all based in France.
They have all "very clearly stated that they have not acquired and are not acquiring shares of AG," he said. 

Any raider would find it hard to crack AG's battlements.
A "syndicate" of shareholders holds just under 50% of AG, Mr. Lippens said, and members have agreed to give one another the right of first refusal should they sell any AG shares. 

Aside from Generale de Belgique and Asahi, the syndicate includes Antwerpsche Hypotheekkas, a Belgian savings bank, and various family interests. 

A Generale spokesman confirmed that the giant Belgian holding company would be willing to raise its stake in AG should a raider seek control.
Asahi officials couldn't be reached for comment. 

Even without bid talk, this year's surge in prices for Brussels real estate has excited interest in AG.
The company says those holdings constitute the third-biggest real-estate portfolio in Belgium. 

