.START 

Bond Corp. Holdings Ltd. posted a loss for fiscal 1989 of 980.2 million Australian dollars (US$762.4 million), the largest in Australian corporate history. 

That loss compared with a year-earlier profit of A$273.5 million.
In preliminary, unaudited results reported Friday, Bond Corp. also posted an operating loss of A$814.1 million for the year ended June 30, compared with operating profit of A$354.7 million a year earlier. 

Operating revenue rose 69% to A$8.48 billion from A$5.01 billion.
But the net interest bill jumped 85% to A$686.7 million from A$371.1 million.
Bond Corp. has interests in brewing, media and communications, natural resources and property. 

Much of Bond Corp. 's losses stemmed from one-time write-downs of the value of some of Bond Corp. 's assets and those of its units.
The results included a A$453.4 million write-off of future income-tax benefits and a provision for a loss of A$149.5 million on the sale of a stake of about 20% in Lonrho PLC. However, Bond Corp. said the tax benefits remain available and might be used later. 

Earnings before interest and tax from brewing dived 50% to A$123.8 million from A$247.3 million.
The company said the general financial performance of its U.S. brewing operations, G. Heileman Brewing Co., was "disappointing, and this has been reflected in the results." 

Bond Corp. 's shares closed Friday before news of the results at 28 Australian cents a share, up one Australian cent. 

The staggering losses cap a tumultuous year for Alan Bond and his flagship, Bond Corp. Only a year ago, the chairman of Bond Corp., who controls about 58% of the company, appeared to be building a war chest to attack some big companies.
Now Bond Corp. has agreed to sell at least half its Australian brewing assets.
It has sold billions of dollars of other assets and has more on the block. 

But in a TV interview Sunday Mr. Bond said, "We've taken a big loss.
We've taken it on the chin.
But we're out there and we're going to stay in business. 

Bond Corp. signaled it will focus on building its domestic and international media and communications businesses.
It said it will look at opportunities in brewing, property and energy resources to the extent consistent with the dominant objective of manageable debt-to-assets ratios.
The result "will ultimately be a very different group in size and structure," Bond Corp. directors said in a statement. 

Some analysts contend the total writeoffs should have been much greater, and Bond Corp. 's auditors cited a list of several assets and deals about which there is "uncertainty" regarding the current value and potential impact on the firm. 

Bond Corp. said the acknowledged losses mean net asset backing is in the red to the tune of 53 Australian cents a share, vs. positive asset backing of A$1.92 a share a year ago.
Still, the directors said, "Having fully considered all aspects of the company's state of affairs and future cash flows, the directors confirm absolutely that the company is solvent." 

Indeed, in a note to the results, directors said if the "true worth" of some of the group's assets were taken into account instead of using book values, the negative net asset backing a share would turn into "a substantial positive" one. 

