.START 

Diversification pays. 

That's a fundamental lesson for investors, but its truth was demonstrated once again in the performance of mutual funds during and after the stock market's Friday-the-13th plunge. 

Stock funds, like the market as a whole, generally dropped more than 2% in the week through last Thursday, according to figures compiled by Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
That reflects the huge drop a week ago Friday, last Monday's rebound and the dips and blips that followed. 

But several other types of funds shielded investors from the worst of the market's slide.
Funds that invest internationally were the top-performing stock and fixed-income funds. 

"More than ever, people should realize they should have a diversified portfolio," said Jeremy Duffield, a senior vice president of Vanguard Group. "That means stocks, bonds, money market instruments and real estate." 

One week's performance shouldn't be the basis for any investment decision.
But the latest mutual fund performance figures do show what can happen when the going gets rough. 

"You want to know how a fund did when the market got hammered," said Kurt Brouwer, an investment adviser with Brouwer & Janachowski in San Francisco. "It's like kicking the tires of a car . . . . What you want to know is when the road's rough, when there's snow and ice, how's this car going to perform?" 

General equity funds fell an average of 2.35% in the week ended Thursday, compared with a 2.32% slide for the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.
But Lipper Analytical's figures show that there were a number of ways investors could have cushioned themselves from the stock market's gyrations. 

Gold-oriented funds, for instance, which invest in companies that mine and process the precious metal, posted an average decline of 1.15%.
Flexible portfolio funds, which allocate investments among stocks, bonds and money-market instruments and other investments, declined at about half the rate of stock funds -- an average drop of 1.27%, according to Lipper. 

Global allocation funds take the asset-allocation concept one step further by investing at least 25% of their portfolios outside the U.S.
This gives them the added benefits of international diversification -- including a foreign-exchange boost during periods, like the past week, when the dollar declines against other major currencies.
With all that going for them, global flexible portfolio funds declined only 1.07% in the week through last Thursday. 

But while the merits of diversification shine through when times are tough, there's also a price to pay: A diversified portfolio always underperforms an undiversified portfolio during those times when the investment in the undiversified portfolio is truly hot. 

And Friday the 13th notwithstanding, stocks have been this year's hot investment.
Thus, even including the latest week, the average general stock fund has soared more than 24% so far this year, the Lipper Analytical figures show. 

By comparison, global asset allocation funds have turned in an average total return of about 19%, while domestic flexible portfolios are up about 17%.
Fixed-income funds have returned 8.2%, while gold funds, which tend to be volatile, have risen just 4.55%, on average. 

"That's the problem with trying to hedge too much," said Mr. Brouwer. "You don't make any real money." Over the last 20 years, for example, Mr. Brouwer says, an investor putting $5,000 a year in the S&P 500 would have made nearly twice as much than if it were invested in Treasury bills. 

Some equity funds did better than others in the week that began on Friday the 13th.
The $4 million Monetta Fund, for instance, was the seventh top performing fund for the week, with a 2.65% return.
Its return so far this year has been a credible 21.71%. 

The fund's strategy is to sell when a stock appreciates 30% over its cost.
By the time the market plummeted 10 days ago, Monetta was 55% in cash, said Robert Bacarella, president and portfolio manager.
Last Monday, he started "buying the high-quality growth companies that people were throwing away at discount prices." Among Mr. Bacarella's picks: Oracle Systems, Reebok International Ltd. and Digital Microwave Corp.
The fund's cash position is now about 22%, which Mr. Bacarella calls "still bearish." 

Among the big stock funds, Dreyfus Fund, with more than $2 billion in assets, had a decline of just 1.49% for the week and a return of 21.42% for the year.
Howard Stein, chairman of Dreyfus Corp., said the fund was about half invested in government bonds on Oct. 13, and about 10% in cash. "In a downward market, bonds act better," he said. "We still think there's a lot of unsettlement in this market.
We believe interest rates will continue to trend lower, and the economy will slow around the world." 

Many of the funds that did best in the last week are heavily invested overseas, giving them the benefit of foreign currency translations when the dollar is weak.
From its high point on Thursday, Oct. 12, to where it traded late in New York a week later, the dollar fell 3.6% against the West German mark, 3.4% against the British pound and 2.1% against the Japanese yen. 

Three International Cash Portfolios funds, which invest almost exclusively in bonds and money-market instruments overseas, were among the four top-performing funds in the latest week.
Because the funds' investments are denominated in foreign currencies, their value expressed in dollars goes up when those currencies rise against the dollar.
But when the dollar rises against major foreign currencies, as it did for much of this year, the dollar value of these funds declines.
All three funds posted negative returns for the year to date. 

Of the funds that fared the worst in the post-Oct. 13 week, two are heavily invested in airlines stocks, which led the market slide following problems with financing for the UAL Corp. buy-out plan.
Reflecting airline takeover activity, however, both the Fidelity Select Air Transportation Portfolio and the National Aviation & Technology fund posted better-than-average returns for the the year to date: 30.09% for the Fidelity Air Transportation fund and a whopping 47.24% for National Aviation & Technology. 

The small drop in equity funds in general in the latest week may not necessarily be a good sign, said A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical.
Noting that equity funds are up nearly 60% from their post-crash low on Dec. 3, 1987, he said that what happened last week "may not be enough of an adjustment.
There's either more to come or an extremely long period of dullness." 

But investors don't seem to think so.
Several big mutual fund groups said last week that cash flows into stock funds were heavier than usual after heavy outflows on the 13th.
Vanguard Group said it had a more than $50 million net inflow into its stock funds last week. 

"There certainly hasn't been a panic reaction," said Steven Norwitz, a vice president at T. Rowe Price Associates. "People showed some staying power and, in fact, interest in buying equities." 

Source: Lipper Analytical Services Inc. 

*Not counting dividends 

**With dividends reinvested 

Sources: Lipper Analytical Services Inc.; Standard & Poor's Corp. 

