.START 

France's national tobacco company, known for making brown-tobacco cigarettes such as Gauloises and Gitanes, is branching out. 

Concerned by dipping demand for its traditional products, it is moving not only into blonde cigarettes, but also into electronic car-parking payment cards to be sold in neighborhood tobacco stores.
Brown tobacco in France is a more pungent, stronger grade than the lighter grade, or blonde tobacco, used in so-called American-style cigarettes. 

"We aren't Philip Morris Cos.," says Bertrand de Galle, chairman of government-owned Societe Nationale d'Exploitation Industrielle des Tabacs & Allumettes S.A., known as Seita.
He says that because Seita's profits are limited by government-controlled cigarette prices, he doesn't have the cash to diversify as heavily into food and drink as the U.S. concern has done. (Last year, for example, Seita's net profit soared 150% to 461.6 million French francs ($73.5 million) on sales of FFr27.68 billion-a 1.7% profit margin.) 

Instead, he said in an interview, he is looking for ways to exploit France's network of 39,000 tobacco agents, most of them cafes.
While Seita doesn't own the French tabacs, its close alliance with them offers distribution possibilities. 

One proposal is to introduce a new payment system for parking in Paris.
Instead of paying for parking by putting money in the existing machines, which deliver little paper receipts, drivers would be able to buy electronic cards in local tobacco shops.
Once activated, the card would sit in the car's window, showing traffic wardens how much time the motorist could remain.
When the motorist returned to his car he could turn the card off and, if it showed time remaining, save it for later.
Seita is a partner in the project, which was developed by Matra SA using Japanese technology.
Seita and Matra currently are negotiating with city officials for the right to begin service. 

And Seita is considering further diversification.
It wanted to buy RJR Nabisco Inc. 's French cracker subsidiary, Belin, in hopes of selling its products in tobacco stores, but lost the bidding to food group BSN SA.
It currently is considering bidding for Swedish Match Co.
And it retains an interest in acquiring candies and other articles that might be sold in tobacco shops. 

It also is trying to shore up its tobacco business.
Brown-tobacco cigarettes such as Gauloises now make up just 40% of the French tobacco market, half the level of about two decades ago.
While Seita retains a manufacturing monopoly in France, it is being hurt by rising imports and from waning cigarette demand. 

So Seita has introduced blonde cigarettes under the Gauloises label, and intends to relaunch the unsuccessful Gitanes Blondes in new packaging, similar to the slide-packs used by brown-tobacco Gitanes.
The aim, says Mr. de Galle, is to win market share from imported cigarettes, and to persuade smokers who are switching to blonde cigarettes to keep buying French. 

