.START 

Oil Spill Case Shows 

Liability Fund Flaws 

AN UNRESOLVED two-year-old dispute stemming from an Alaskan oil spill has helped spur a drive for tougher federal laws to protect victims of such accidents. 

The class-action suit highlights shortcomings of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund, which gets its money from oil companies using the pipeline and compensates those harmed by oil spills. 

On July 2, 1987, the tanker S.S. Glacier Bay struck a rock and spilled almost 150,000 gallons of oil into the Cook Inlet.
Commercial fishermen and fish processors filed suit in federal court in a claim that has ballooned to more than $104.8 million.
Defendants include British Petroleum America; Trinidad Corp., the shipper; and the pipeline liability fund. 

The fund was created by the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Act, which provides that the owner or operator of a vessel involved in an oil spill must pay the first $14 million in damages.
The fund is required to pay claims up to an additional $86 million. 

The fund's purpose is to provide quick and adequate relief.
But the Glacier Bay case, the fund's first test, shows how easily the fund can be undermined.
Trinidad Corp. is contesting liability.
It claims the Coast Guard failed to chart the rock and refuses to pay damages.
That means the fund isn't obligated to pay anything, at least so far. 

The Oil Pollution Act, scheduled to come up for a vote in Congress this fall, would provide that if claimants aren't paid within 90 days of a spill, the liability fund would compensate them and seek reimbursement from the owner or operator of the vessel, says a spokesman for Rep. George Miller (D., Calif.), a sponsor of the bill.
The spokesman says the "glitch" in the statute is "the worst kind of Catch-22." 

Many Law School Grads 

Find Classes Never End 

RECENT LAW school graduates are starting jobs with law firms this fall -- and heading back to class. 

Bar associations and consultants are offering more programs to teach associates all they need to know about law but didn't learn in law school. "Law school teaches wonderful theory, but it doesn't teach the nuts and bolts of practical lawyering," says Aaron Weitz, head of a New York County Lawyers' Association committee that sponsors such a course. 

In the past, associates learned the basics from senior lawyers who acted as mentors.
But these days, large firms hire as many as 30 new associates a year, and it's impossible to personally train everyone, says Joel Henning of Hildebrandt Inc., a consulting firm that runs training classes. 

The Hildebrandt course enables students to brush up on negotiation skills by role playing in simulated deals.
Students also are taught to return clients' phone calls immediately and to treat the support staff with respect. 

Many law firms sponsor their own programs.
At the Baltimore firm of Weinberg & Green, new corporate and banking associates are required to enroll in a 20-class course.
Partners lecture on how to form corporations, draft agreements and defend clients against unwanted tender offers. 

Now, clients know that new associates have had some practical training before working on their cases, says James J. Hanks, a partner at the firm. 

Los Angeles Creates 

A Courthouse for Kids 

THE CHILDREN of Los Angeles will soon have their own $52 million courthouse. 

The building, which will handle child abuse, custody and foster care cases, will be "less formal, less threatening and just basically less grim than most courthouses," says Edmund Edelman, chairman of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. 

Designs call for an L-shaped structure with a playground in the center.
There will be recreation and movie rooms.
Teens will be able to listen to music with headsets.
Study halls, complete with reference materials, will be available.
And there will be a nurse's station and rooms for children to meet with social workers. 

The building's 25 courtrooms will be smaller, says Charlene Saunders, a court administrator.
The bench will be lower so the judge seems less intimidating, and walls will be painted in bright colors and covered with murals. 

Cases in Los Angeles County involving dependent children are usually heard in the Criminal Courts Building. "We need to get the kids away from the criminals into a less traumatic environment," says Mr. Edelman.
About 45,000 children in Los Angeles County are under court supervision, Mr. Edelman says, and an average of 1,500 new children are added each month. 

The courthouse, to be built in Monterey Park, is expected to open in the spring of 1992. 

Law Firm Management 

Can Be Quite Rewarding 

IT PAYS to follow a management career path -- even at law firms. 

That's the conclusion of a recent study of large law firms conducted by Altman & Weil Inc., an Ardmore, Pa., law firm consultant.
Its survey of 96 firms, each with 100 to 1,000 lawyers, shows that managing partners earned an average of $395,974 in compensation and cash benefits in the firms' 1988 fiscal years. 

Managing partners who responded to the survey typically spend over half their time supervising their firms' day-to-day operations and just a little more than a third of their time practicing law. 

Partners in the survey who devote most of their time to practicing law earned an average of about $217,000. 

