.START 

Winnebago Industries Inc., battered by a deepening slowdown in recreational vehicle industry sales, reported a widened fourth-quarter loss and slashed its dividend in half. 

The Forest City, Iowa, maker of motor homes said it had a loss of $11.3 million, or 46 cents a share, in the quarter ended Aug. 26.
A year earlier, the company had a deficit of $1.5 million, or six cents a share. 

The cut in the dividend to 10 cents a share semiannually, from 20 cents, "would indicate to me they don't see the problems being fixed real quick," said Frank Rolfes, an analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc. in Minneapolis.
Indeed, Winnebago said it started "several promotional programs" to spur retail sales in the fall and winter. 

The year was already shaping up as a difficult one for the recreational vehicle industry, which makes products such as motor homes, travel trailers, folding campers and van conversions.
With the exception of van conversions, the industry has seen a decline from 1988's robust sales.
But the rate of the decline snowballed in August, with unit sales to dealers for the month down 10.5% from a year earlier, according to the Recreation Vehicle Industry Association. 

At Winnebago, sales for the quarter fell 6% to $89.5 million from $95.4 million a year earlier.
The company attributed the decline to consumers' concern over interest rates and gas prices -- two key expenses for RV buyers. 

"It's a large-ticket discretionary purchase," said Robert Curran, who follows the industry for Merrill Lynch & Co. "So when there's talk and concern about the economy, it's not unreasonable for a portion of the buying public to defer purchases." 

Mr. Curran expects industry RV sales for all of 1989 to fall about 5% from 1988, when sales of 427,300 units were the highest since 1978.
And he said the weakness could continue in the first half of next year.
But he said the industry has "a good decade ahead," particularly if aging baby boomers fulfill the industry's dreams by buying RVs. 

Winnebago was hit especially hard in the latest downturn because unit sales in its bread-and-butter motor home business tumbled 25% industrywide in August, and 10.4% in the first eight months of the year.
The company said it also suffered in the quarter from incentive programs, losses from discontinuing a motor home line and costs of developing a new commercial vehicle, among other things. 

The news sent Winnebago stock falling 62.5 cents, to $5.25, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading-a 52-week low. 

The dividend cut will prove most costly for John K. Hanson, Winnebago's founder and chairman.
Based on his control of about 45% of Winnebago's 24.7 million shares, his annual dividend income would be cut to about $2.2 million from $4.4 million. 

For the year, Winnebago had a loss of $4.7 million, or 19 cents a share, following profit of $2.7 million, or 11 cents a share, a year earlier.
Sales rose 2% to $437.5 million from $430.3 million. 

