.START 

The Dallas Cowboys are looking at a long-yardage situation, struggling to pull ahead of the Atlanta Falcons.
Up in his stadium box, their new and controversial owner, Jerral "Jerry" Jones, watches anxiously as the team bounds up to the scrimmage line. 

Mr. Jones takes heart.
There in the center of the pack is quarterback Troy Aikman, the key to the Cowboys' comeback strategy.
So key, in fact, that Mr. Jones signed him in April for $11.4 million over the next six years -- a record for a rookie. "He's a genuine Wheaties-box athlete," gushes Mr. Jones. 

With three minutes left on the clock, Mr. Aikman takes the snap, steps back and fires a 21-yard pass -- straight into the hands of an Atlanta defensive back.
The crowd groans, Mr. Jones shakes his head, the Cowboys lose the game.
A few days after that Sept. 17 game, Mr. Aikman broke a finger, sidelining him for weeks. 

Ah, the glamour of professional sports.
For Mr. Jones, losing his quarterback temporarily was just the latest in a string of setbacks that has beset the Dallas Cowboys -- and, this year, much of the National Football League.
Once fat and happy, the Cowboys now are losing games, fans and money.
Last year, the team ended up $2 million in the red on $30 million in revenue.
It has some of the highest costs in the league.
Its attendance is off 23% from six years ago. 

At the very least, Mr. Jones, who cultivates the society circuit as eagerly as his bench, can take comfort in one fact: These days, he isn't alone.
Nearly half the owners of the 28 National Football League teams are losing money, the result of flat attendance, aging stadiums and -- more than anything -- skyrocketing salaries for star players like Mr. Aikman. 

Last year, the top 12 players on each NFL team took home an average $536,000, a figure comparable to baseball and higher than in basketball.
First-round draft picks have done even better: Average salaries and bonuses for them rose to $685,000 this year, up 44% from 1987. "It's a vicious circle," says Art Modell, owner of the Cleveland Browns. "One team pays so much and the other pays more.
We just don't have that kind of income stream." 

All this is causing convulsions in professional football.
Owners, largely complacent in the past, are now almost desperately looking for ways to lower costs and raise revenue -- embracing some revolutionary ideas in the process.
Though not intentionally, the Cowboys' Mr. Jones has come to represent this new breed of owner. 

Shortly after buying 66% of the team from H.R. "Bum" Bright for $145 million, and mindful of the Cowboys' ragged bottom line, the 47-year-old Mr. Jones set about his own round of team cuts.
First, he unceremoniously sacked Tom Landry, the legendary coach who took the Cowboys to five Super Bowls and 20 consecutive winning seasons.
In Dallas, Mr. Landry has a standing just shy of sainthood.
Anti-Jones sentiment flooded the local press: "A crude obnoxious hick," said one writer; "a real oink," said another; "Who in the hell does he think he is?" wrote a third. 

For Mr. Jones, it was just the beginning.
He quickly cut the team's bloated administrative staff by half, shut down a Cowboys-owned dance academy and, in July, announced plans to sell Valley Ranch, the team's 30-acre practice camp and the most lavish training facility in the NFL. Mr. Jones calls the ranch "the Pentagon of Sportdom." It is a maze of halls that connects film rooms, elaborate spas and weight-training centers that testify to a richer, more free-spending era.
He likes to tell the yarn of how he got lost on the expansive ranch during an early visit, took refuge in an office and called the front desk for help. "I said, `Somebody come get me.
I'm at extension 29. '" 

With a new day dawning on the sport, Mr. Jones doesn't see a place for this sort of luxury. "It's just not cost efficient," he says.
The place costs nearly $2 million a year to maintain.
When he sells it, he says, the Cowboys will move to a more practical -- read affordable -- grass practice field near Texas Stadium. 

And as for Tom Landry, well, in Mr. Jones's mind, he had played out his winning years.
After posting losing seasons in each of the last three years, the Cowboys needed a change, he says. 

Football has long been Mr. Jones's passion, both on and off the field.
An Arkansas native, he started at guard on the undefeated 1964 University of Arkansas team that won a national championship.
After college, he worked at his father's insurance company in Little Rock, and in 1966 led an aborted attempt to buy the San Diego Chargers.
Years later, with cash from the sale of the insurance company, he founded Arkoma Production Corp., an oil and gas exploration company based in Little Rock. 

So it wasn't surprising that Mr. Jones returned to his Arkansas roots when he went looking for a replacement for Mr. Landry.
He tapped Jimmy Johnson, a teammate on the 1964 University of Arkansas squad and the head coach at the University of Miami, where he led the Hurricanes to five winning seasons and a national championship in 1987.
Whatever Mr. Johnson's talents, in the hearts and minds of many Dallas fans, he is no Tom Landry.
Seven games (and, after a loss to the Kansas City Chiefs yesterday, seven losses) into the season, the "new" Cowboys aren't doing any better than the old.
In fact, the last time they played this badly was in 1960, their opening season.
Average attendance at their games, about 49,000 last year, continues flat. 

Mr. Jones is attacking the problem on several fronts.
He continues to reshuffle the team, trading famed running back Herschel Walker to the Minnesota Vikings this month for a slew of players and future draft picks.
To try to draw more fans, he has dropped end-zone ticket prices from $25 to $19.
But the general trend, given rising costs in the league, has been to raise prices, and Mr. Jones is expected to eventually follow suit. "It's simple," says Lamar Hunt, who owns the Kansas City Chiefs and last year raised ticket prices by $2.40 to an average $17. "If we didn't increase prices, we'd be in the red." 

Mr. Jones has also beefed up his marketing staff to sell the 118 luxury suites topping Texas Stadium (his deal with Bum Bright included operating rights for the stadium).
The suites are air-conditioned, have wet bars and plush seating, and offer a clear view of the field -- all for a sale price of $475,000 to $1 million, depending on their size and location.
Mr. Jones has been taking prospective suite owners onto the field during practice to let them rub elbows with players, and promises those who actually buy one of the rooms an insider's look at the team's strategy before game time.
The sales job seems to be paying off: When he bought the team, only six of the suites had been sold.
Today, 30 have. 

Gate receipts are only the Cowboys' second largest source of cash.
The biggest is the NFL's contract with national television for broadcast of the league's games.
Last year, the Cowboys' share of that pie came to $17.6 million.
The team additionally earns between $2 million and $4 million for local radio and television broadcast rights.
Mr. Jones is currently trying to jack up the price for those local rights.
He is also trying to get more stations in Mexico, where the Cowboys have a following, to pick up the games. 

Mr. Jones, whose twangy voice and folksy ways belie an intense businessman who works 16-hour days, is resigned to the hefty salaries he pays his players these days.
He calls the contracts "critical to winning in the NFL" and has played his part in the bidding wars.
Besides signing Mr. Aikman to a sizable contract, Mr. Jones has agreed to pay rookie quarterback Steve Walsh $4.1 million over the next four years. 

This wage inflation is bleeding the NFL dry, the owners contend.
Soon, only large corporations will be able to afford to buy and run football teams, predicts John J. Veatch Jr., an investment banker with Salomon Brothers who handled the Cowboys sale.
To tackle the problem, NFL owners have proposed setting a rookie wage scale to try to rein in salaries.
Details of the plan, which would go into effect in 1993, are sketchy, but each player would apparently be paid a base salary keyed to his position and ability.
Bonuses would be paid based on playing time and performance. 

The NFL Players Association, meanwhile, contends that athletes are paid a wage commensurate with their ability to draw fans, and that some owners are in financial trouble because of poor business management, not players' salaries. 

The owners are trying to boost profit in other ways, too.
Many have launched promotions to attract new fans and are renegotiating dated stadium contracts.
Most of the owners must pay up to 10% of gross ticket sales for leases on stadiums they say are either too small or too old.
In Chicago, for example, size is the issue. 

"We have the worst lease in the NFL," contends Michael B. McCaskey, the president of the Chicago Bears and a grandson of George Halas, who founded the NFL's predecessor organization. "We're in a metro area with millions of Bear fans, and only a small number can be accommodated." When the lease expires in 1999, he says, "It's got to be changed." 

This year, the NFL also imposed an 80-player limit on teams going into training camp, down from 120, in a move meant to trim payroll costs.
And the league is trying to get more for its three-year national network contract, which expires after this season.
The current contract pays the NFL $1.4 billion.
Owners say they expect the league to demand a 50% increase, despite the fact that televised football games have had lackluster ratings.
An NFL spokesman also says the league will probably expand its offerings to cable TV companies like ESPN. 

The changes haven't come easy.
Like the game of professional football, the NFL organization itself is in turmoil.
The new breed of team owner, Mr. Jones included, has been fighting the NFL bureaucracy for a greater say in league affairs, and the battle has produced a form of organizational gridlock.
In July, 11 NFL owners, almost all of them new, blocked an effort to install Jim Finks as a replacement for retiring league commissioner Pete Rozelle.
Mr. Finks is perceived by some owners as a standard-bearer for the Old Guard.
Earlier this month, another effort to choose a commissioner failed.
The owners meet again tomorrow. 

For his part, Jerry Jones says he's in the business for the long haul, and his work style seems to support that.
He puts in busy six-day weeks (excluding game days), and on one recent afternoon fielded questions, in the course of an hour, from a TV producer, his luxury-suite marketing manager, a disgruntled customer and a roomful of Arkansas reporters.
To keep his schedule on track, he flies two personal secretaries in from Little Rock to augment his staff in Dallas. 

"When I made this investment, I made it on a lifetime basis," he explains. "I'm not here to make money by reselling the team later on.
While the Cowboys may not be the best investment now, I don't accept they can't be in the future." 

Besides, to a large extent, Mr. Jones may already be getting what he wants out of the team, even though it keeps losing.
Owning the Cowboys has bought him entree to a glitzy life that drilling for oil in Arkansas just didn't provide.
There is the new private jet, the platoon of assistants, invitations to the best parties, and television appearances on shows such as "Prime Time Live." A few weeks ago, Mr. Jones even entertained Elizabeth Taylor in his private suite at Texas Stadium. 

"You're in the catbird seat every day in this job," he says. 

