.START 

Ford Motor Co. and Saab-Scania AB of Sweden broke off talks about a possible alliance after Ford officials concluded that the cost to modernize Saab's car operations would outweigh the likely return. 

With the collapse of the talks Friday, European analysts expect Ford to intensify its pursuit of British luxury car maker Jaguar PLC, which is scrambling to fend off a hostile Ford bid by negotiating a friendly alliance with Ford's archrival, General Motors Corp. 

Saab, meanwhile, is left to continue its search for an ally to shore up its sagging car business.
Saab said last week it "has had and will continue to have contacts with other manufacturers." Among the possible suitors is Italy's Fiat S.p.A, analysts said last week. 

Ford and Saab officials declined to elaborate publicly on the announcement Friday that their negotiations failed to yield an agreement "that could make long-term business sense to both parties." 

Individuals close to the Ford side of the negotiations said late last week that the No. 2 U.S. auto maker lost interest as it became clear that the Swedish auto maker's automotive operations had little to offer in the way of image or technology.
Ford originally had seen a Saab alliance as a way to expand its presence in the European and U.S. luxury car markets.
In addition, Ford and Saab had discussed a possible link between their heavy truck operations. 

But the talks on a heavy truck alliance apparently didn't go far.
Some European analysts speculated that officials of Saab's highly profitable Scania truck operation balked at surrendering any of their autonomy. 

Meanwhile, Ford officials became convinced they couldn't expect to recover the investment it would require to make Saab's cars competitive in the increasingly crowded luxury market. 

Saab's problems were underscored Friday when the company announced that its car division had a 1.2 billion kronor ($186.1 million) loss during the first eight months of this year, slightly worse than Saab-Scania had forecast in its first-half report last month.
Overall, Saab-Scania's pretax profit during the first eight months of the year plunged 48.9% to 1 billion Swedish kronor ($155.1 million) from 1.96 billion kronor ($303.9 million) a year earlier. 

Industry analysts in Europe said the most likely suitor for Saab now is Fiat.
Saab and Fiat have worked together in the past, in one case developing jointly a new auto chassis that became the foundation of Saab's 9000 model, Fiat's Croma and Lancia's Thema.
Last month, Saab-Scania Chief Executive Georg Karnsund said his company has had talks with Fiat about a broader alliance.
But the talks yielded "nothing so advanced that we needed to make a public announcement about it," he said. 

As for Ford, analysts expect the end of the Saab play will allow the U.S. auto maker to focus its resources on the intensifying struggle with GM for a stake in Jaguar. 

The failure of the Saab talks "makes it even more crucial for {Ford} to be victorious" in the Jaguar contest, said Stephen Reitman, European auto industry analyst at UBS-Phillips & Drew in London. 

Ford faces an uphill fight for Jaguar, however.
Jaguar executives said last week they expect to have a friendly alliance with GM wrapped up by the end of the month.
GM, meanwhile, is hosting a delegation of members of the British Parliament who are touring the auto maker's headquarter operations in Detroit.
A GM spokesman said the visit isn't connected to the Jaguar situation. 

But Ford clearly views Jaguar as a prize worth fighting for, since the company's gilded brand image would give Ford a badly needed leg up in the high end of the luxury markets in both Europe and the U.S. Last week, Ford encountered a setback in its effort to broaden its U.S. luxury offerings when it was forced to abandon a four-year-old effort to market its German-built Scorpio sedan in the U.S. as a luxury import under the Merkur brand name. 

So despite the GM-Jaguar romance, analysts say Ford by last Friday had boosted its Jaguar holding to about 11% of the luxury auto maker's shares outstanding from 10.4% early last week.
About 5.4 million Jaguar shares changed hands in active trading on London's stock exchange Friday, and Jaguar shares moved up 19 pence to 696 pence ($11).
On the U.S. over-the-counter market, Jaguar's American depositary receipts rose 12.5 cents to $11.125. 

Joann S. Lublin contributed to this article. 

