.START 

Move over, pornographic phone services: A legal service with a "900" number has been launched in California. 

A Newport Beach law firm started the pay-as-you-go legal service, called Telelawyer, using MCI Communication Corp. 's toll-tele-phone service.
Cane & Associates touts its $2-a-minute service as the "cheapest legal hour you'll ever find." 

Though the service is available only in California, Telelawyer founder Michael Cane says he plans to franchise it in other states.
He says his aim is to reach people who are bedridden, have no access to transportation, can't find a lawyer to take their case or simply can't afford lawyers' consultation fees. 

Mr. Cane stresses that he isn't using the telephone to lure clients to his doorstep. "We will only deal with clients on the phone," he says. "We have no in-office business." 

Telelawyer is apparently the only telephone service that offers the telephone equivalent of an office visit.
Local bar associations in some states have numbers that provide free tape-recorded messages explaining certain areas of the law.
There also are "800" hotlines which refer people to lawyers, usually personal-injury specialists, for in-office consultation. 

When a caller reaches Telelawyer by dialing 900-TELELAW, a receptionist refers the call to one of six attorneys.
In an effort to determine whether a caller has reason to sue, Cane lawyers review documents and perform research, if necessary, with the help of three law clerks and several support staffers.
There is no charge for research -- only for time on the phone.
If the matter requires further legal work or litigation, Mr. Cane says, his lawyers may refer the client to a law firm.
But he says Cane & Associates doesn't receive referral fees. 

So far, says Mr. Cane, most calls have involved landlord-tenant problems, tax problems, divorce, and probate questions.
The firm is getting about 50 calls a day, and the average call lasts about 15 minutes.
Out of the $2 charge, the law firm pockets about $1.55. 

JURY CONVICTS congressman in connection with Wedtech Corp. scandal. 

A federal court jury in New York found U.S. Rep. Robert Garcia (D., N.Y.) and his wife, Jane Lee Garcia, guilty of extorting $76,000 from Wedtech in return for official acts by the congressman.
The jury also convicted them of extortion in obtaining a $20,000, interest-free loan from a Wedtech officer.
The jury found them guilty of conspiracy in obtaining the payments, some of which were disguised as fees for consulting services from Mrs. Garcia. 

Wedtech, which became embroiled in political-corruption cases that eventually led to its demise, formerly was a minority-owned South Bronx, N.Y., defense contractor.
Edward J.M. Little, one of the assistant U.S. attorneys who prosecuted the case, said the Garcia trial "is the last of the Wedtech prosecutions." Mr. Little said more than 20 people have been convicted in the Wedtech cases, including former U.S. Rep. Mario Biaggi (D., N.Y.). 

Lawyers for the Garcias said they plan to appeal.
Mr. Garcia, who represents New York's 18th congressional district, which includes the Bronx, said he hasn't decided whether he will resign. 

"In the next few weeks, I will be consulting with my political advisers and with the Democratic leaders about the best way of preserving the interests of my constituents," said Mr. Garcia, 56 years old.
Mrs. Garcia, 49, formerly was a member of Mr. Garcia's congressional staff. 

The Garcias were cleared of four other felony counts, involving the receipt of bribes and gratuities. 

U.S. Judge Leonard B. Sand set the Garcias' sentencing for Jan. 5. 

FIVE SHEA & GOULD PARTNERS are leaving to form a new firm. 

The new firm, Hutton Ingram Yuzek Gainen Carroll & Bertolotti, will be based in New York.
The five partners who resigned from Shea & Gould late last week are Tom Hutton, Sam Ingram, Dean Yuzek, Daniel Carroll and Ernest Bertolotti.
They will be joined by Larry Gainen, who resigned from the firm of LePatner, Gainen & Block. 

Howard Rubenstein, a New York publicist who represents Shea & Gould, said, "Shea & Gould understands they're leaving because they wanted a different environment -- a smaller firm they would be principals of." Mr. Rubenstein said the five, who weren't on Shea & Gould's management committee, "are leaving on good terms." 

He said Shea & Gould held a number of discussions with the five partners during the past few weeks to get them to stay but that the five were firmly committed to running their own firm. 

Hutton Ingram will have a general corporate, securities, real-estate and litigation practice, and a substantial practice serving the professional-design community. 

DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS against lawyers open to public in Illinois. 

While investigations into lawyer misconduct will remain secret, the public will be notified once a formal complaint is filed against an attorney.
The actual disciplinary hearings will be public. 

In addition, Illinois attorneys will lose the right to sue clients who file malicious complaints against them.
Non-lawyers will be added to the inquiry panels that look into allegations of misconduct. 

Illinois joins 36 other states that allow public participation in attorney-disciplinary proceedings and 32 states that open disciplinary hearings to the public, according to the American Bar Association. 

One vocal critic of the changes, Chicago lawyer Warren Lupel, says non-lawyers shouldn't be on the inquiry panels because they are unlikely to appreciate the nuances of attorney-client relationships.
In addition, he says, publishing the names of lawyers who are facing charges unnecessarily subjects them to public derogation. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Lupel anticipates no legal action to reverse the Illinois Supreme Court's decision to institute the changes. 

"There's no constitutional right involved in the rule change," he says. "You don't have a right to practice.
You only have a privilege to practice." 

DREXEL BURNHAM LAMBERT Inc. agreed to pay a $50,000 fine to Delaware, the 26th state to settle with Drexel in the wake of the firm's guilty plea to federal insider-trading charges.
Drexel doesn't have a Delaware office, but the New York firm has been negotiating settlements that would allow it to operate freely nationwide despite its record as an admitted felon.
The firm has said it expects to pay $11.5 million overall to settle with states.
Drexel pleaded guilty in September to six felony counts of securities and mail fraud; it also made a $650 million civil settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

