.START 

In a blow to France's Rafale jet fighter, the French navy for the first time publicly stated its desire to buy 15 McDonnell Douglas Corp. F-18 Hornets to defend its aircraft carriers. 

The statement is likely to sharpen the debate within France's military establishment over the Rafale, which is made by Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet Aviation SA. 

In an interview in the navy's official weekly magazine Cols Bleus, the navy's second-in-command, Adm. Yves Goupil, said the navy still intends to buy 86 Rafales as scheduled in the late 1990s and early 21st century.
The air force is to take at least 250 more. 

Adm. Goupil said the navy can't wait until 1998, when the naval Rafale becomes available, to replace its obsolete fleet of American-made Crusaders, used since the 1950s to protect carriers from attack.
Rather than renovate the Crusaders, which Dassault is proposing to do for around 1.8 billion French francs ($286.6 million), Adm. Goupil said the navy wants to buy used F-18s from the U.S. Navy. 

Officially, the statement isn't an attack on the Rafale.
Adm. Goupil said that when the F-18s wear out, the navy is prepared to take Rafales to replace them.
But unofficially, senior navy officials sharply criticize the Rafale as an air force plane ill-suited to carrier use.
Although they never said so publicly, they have made no secret of their preference for the F-18 on operational grounds. 

Adm. Goupil's comments are likely to inflame the broader dispute within the military establishment here over the role of Dassault.
Although government-controlled, Dassault still is run by the founder's son, Chairman Serge Dassault, who has fiercely protected his company's independence.
The Rafale project is the result of France's inability jointly to develop a plane with other countries, and French officials question whether the state can continue paying for expensive independent programs.
So far, Mr. Dassault has resisted pressure to change. 

What brought the naval issue to a head is that the Crusaders are literally falling apart, without any immediate plan to replace them.
Adm. Goupil, a former Crusader squadron leader, said that the last other country to use Crusaders, the Philippines, retired its last ones two years ago.
A French Crusader crash a few months ago heightened pressure for new planes here. 

Adm. Goupil rejected Dassault's proposal to renovate the Crusaders, saying the cost was impossible to estimate.
Even modernized, he said, the Crusaders represent an obsolete and dangerous protection for the aircraft carriers France has sent to meet such crises as the wars in Lebanon and the Persian Gulf. 

Defense Minister Jean-Pierre Chevenement told a meeting of the Anglo-American Press Association that the question of modernizing the Crusaders or buying used F18s is a "political" decision that he will make in due time. 

