.START 

When the Supreme Court upheld Missouri's abortion restrictions last July, the justices almost certainly didn't have drunk driving, trespassing and false imprisonment on their minds. 

But the 5-4 ruling may have had as much immediate impact on those activities -- especially trespassing -- as on abortion rights. 

The decision, Webster vs. Reproductive Health Services, illustrates how Supreme Court rulings often have a ripple effect, spreading into areas of law and policy that weren't part of the actual cases decided and that never were contemplated by the justices. 

In the Missouri case, unforeseen consequences may have arisen because the high court reinstated the preamble of the state's 1986 abortion law.
The preamble says that human life begins at conception and that unborn children have rights protected by the Constitution. 

Last year, a federal appeals court in St. Louis said the preamble was unconstitutional, citing an earlier Supreme Court ruling that states can't justify stricter abortion curbs by changing the definition of when life begins.
But the Supreme Court concluded that it was premature to rule on the constitutionality of the preamble because the definition of human life hadn't yet been used to restrict abortion services. 

The high court majority said it was up to the state courts for now to decide whether the definition has any bearing on other state laws.
Already, local Missouri judges have relied on the restored preamble in two separate cases to throw out criminal trespass charges against anti-abortion demonstrators who blocked access to Reproductive Health Services, an abortion clinic in St. Louis. 

The protesters said their actions were justified by the desire to save the lives of unborn children.
Under a 1981 Missouri law, persons accused of some crimes, including trespassing, may offer a defense that their actions were justified "as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private injury." Relying on the preamble's statement that a fetus is an unborn child, the two St. Louis County Circuit Court judges in August accepted the justification that the abortion clinic protesters were trying to save lives. 

In another case, a protester, Ann O'Brien, was convicted of trespass before the Supreme Court's Webster ruling.
Last week, when her appeal was argued before the Missouri Court of Appeals, her lawyer also relied on the preamble. 

"The effect of the Supreme Court Webster opinion is that it left room for grass to grow in the cracks of Roe vs. Wade, and I think this is one of the cracks," said Mark Belz, a St. Louis lawyer who represented Ms. O'Brien and the other St. Louis protesters. 
Roe vs. Wade was the Supreme Court's 1973 decision that recognized a woman's right to abortion. 

Mario Mandina, president of Kansas City Lawyers for Life, says that if abortion foes succeed in using the preamble to escape prosecution for trespass, "This will shut down abortion in Missouri.
There's no risk to the protesters, and you can't keep an abortion clinic open if there are 3,000 people standing outside every day." 

That would be an ironic result of a case in which the Supreme Court expressly stopped short of overruling Roe vs. Wade. 

In two other cases, the possible consequences of the Supreme Court ruling appear even more unintended. 

In one, the lawyer for a 20-year-old resident of Columbia, Mo., who was charged with drunk driving, argued that his client should be treated as a 21-year-old adult because his actual age should be calculated from conception, not from birth.
In Missouri, those caught drinking and driving between the ages of 16 and 21 may have their licenses revoked for one year, while those 21 or older suffer only a 30-day suspension.
A Boone County judge rejected the motion, but Daniel Dodson, a Jefferson City lawyer, says he has appealed. 

And in a case filed in federal court in August, a lawyer is arguing that Missouri authorities are wrongfully imprisoning the fetus of a pregnant woman who is in jail for theft and forgery. 

